_**Avatar**_ is a science fiction adventure film written and directed by James Cameron and produced by Jon Landau. It stars Sam Worthington, Zoe Saldaña, Stephen Lang, Michelle Rodriguez, and Sigourney Weaver. It was made by Lightstorm Entertainment and released by 20th Century Fox on December 18, 2009. It is the first installment in the planned film series of five films and was followed by _[[Avatar: The Way of Water]]_ in 2022, which was subsequently followed by _[[Avatar: Fire and Ash]]_ in 2025.

The film is set in the year 2154 on [[Pandora]], a fictional Earth-like moon in a distant planetary system. Humans have depleted their planet's natural resources, resulting in them mining Pandora's reserves of a precious mineral known as [[unobtanium]]. The [[Na'vi]], the race of humanoids indigenous to the moon, resist the colonists' expansion which threatens the continued existence of the Na'vi and the Pandoran ecosystem. The story follows a young man named [[Jake Sully]] who goes to Pandora and meets [[Neytiri]], a member of the [[Omatikaya clan]]. The film's title refers to the remotely controlled, genetically engineered human-Na'vi bodies used by the humans to interact with the Na'vi.

## Plot

#### Jakes recruiting to the Avatar program

In the year 2148, Earth has become a dying planet. It is severely overpopulated with over 20 billion humans. Earth has run out of oil, thousands of animal species such as whales have gone extinct and all remaining resources are rapidly depleting with climate change, pollution, famine, poverty. Humanity's salvation lies on an exomoon called [[Pandora]] in the Alpha Centauri System, which was discovered by a space telescope called COSTIN near the end of the 21st century. As _Avatar_ begins, Pandora has been colonized and terraformed for 35 years.

[[Jacob "Jake" Sully]] is a 22-year-old American man with a desire for his life to matter and have meaning. He is an ex-marine paralyzed from the waist down due to wounds sustained in Venezuela. One night, Jake starts a bar fight with a man who strikes a woman. After breaking up the fight, the bouncers throw Jake out into the street, with one even throwing his wheelchair at him. As it rains, Jake stares into the sky. Jake is approached by two [[Resources Development Administration]] (RDA) agents who confirm his identity and inform him that his identical twin brother, [[Tom Sully], has been killed by a robber.

The agents take Jake to a crematorium where he is shown Tom's body, and Jake laments his brother is dead due to someone wanting paper in his wallet. The agents mention Tom was one of the selected few scientists chose to participate in the Avatar Program and one of even fewer avatar drivers. Since Jake is genetically identical to his brother, he can link with the avatar, saving the RDA the cost of creating a new one. Jake agrees to take over his brother's contract and is put in cryosleep or the trip to Pandora on the [[Interstellar Vehicle]] Venture Star

#### Arrival on Pandora

In 2154, arriving from the six-year journey to Pandora, Jake awakes from cryosleep with hundreds of other personnel to work at the human colony on this inhabited moon of [[Polyphemus]], one of three gas giants orbiting Alpha Centauri A. Pandora is mostly covered with lush rainforests and wildlife, and is home to the [[Na'vi]], a race of tall, blue-skinned humanoids. In the RDA's facility [[Hell's Gate]], Jake attends a briefing led by Colonel [[Miles Quaritch]] of [[SecOps]], a hardened and seasoned military veteran who is in charge of security on the colony. Quaritch welcomes the new personnel and military soldiers and briefs them on Pandora, warning them that the moon is highly dangerous due to wildlife and Na'vi attacks.

Jake is introduced to [[Norm Spellman]], a biologist who arrived on the same rotation of personnel as he did. He also meets Dr. [[Max Patel]], who connects the avatars, and Dr. [[Grace Augustine]], a botanist as well as the leader of the Avatar Program. Grace is displeased with RDA administrator [[Parker Selfridge]]'s decision to use Jake to replace his brother's avatar position. Parker stresses that Grace's science is being paid for by the extremely profitable mineral [[unobtanium]], so she should suck it up and give the RDA some good results from the Avatar Program.

On the day Jake links with his avatar, things go dangerously due to Jake being ecstatic about being able to walk again, causing the scientists to become so concerned they attempt to tranquilize him. He runs outside the compound and enjoys sprinting, causing the scientists to drop their pursuit. Jake then meets with Grace who appears much happier in her avatar form. That night, Jake looks at his queue, a sensitive part of his avatar body that is located at the tip of a long appendage connected to his head (at the end of his "ponytail") that plays an important role in Pandora's ecosystem. After Grace tells him not to play with it or he will "go blind", Jake falls asleep in the avatar compound.

The next day, Jake meets [[Trudy Chacón]]], a retired Marine pilot who is assigned to work with the Avatar Program. Upon hearing that Trudy could use someone else on her Samson's door gun, Jake volunteers. Jake is then directed to Quaritch who convinces Jake to become his informant to gather information on the Na’vi and their home, the [[Omatikaya Hometree]], which has huge deposits of unobtanium buried deep below its surface. He wants Jake to gain their trust and convince them to leave their home within three months. Jake agrees when Quaritch offers to pay for his spinal surgery so that he no longer has to use a wheelchair.

After being trained for several weeks in his new body, Jake, Grace and Norm explore the native wildlife with Trudy. The team explores an abandoned school house where Grace taught young Na'vi English. Grace reminiscences over how intelligent the children were and feels sad upon seeing the unused books scattered on the floor such as The Lorax. Norm asks Grace why the Na'vi don't return, and she replies that they learned as much about humanity as they needed to. Jake notices bullet holes and asks Grace what happened at the school, but she dodges the question.
While Grace and Norm study the wildlife, Jake encounters a group of [[hammerhead titanothere]]s, a rhinoceros-like animal species. However, the titanotheres flee from a [[thanator]], a terrifying land predator. Grace shouts at her group to flee. Jake runs from the thanator, who is after him, and loses most of his equipment and weapon in the process. He narrowly escapes death from the predator and falls into raging rivers below.

#### Living with the Omatikaya

As darkness falls, Jake creates a fire torch using a sap substance on the trees, and once more runs and fights a large group of small sized [viperwolves](/viperwolf). A Na'vi named [[Neytiri]] rescues him and kills several of the viperwolves before they all flee. She is at first angry with Jake for having caused her to kill the viperwolves needlessly and leaves him. Jake goes after Neytiri, who tells him not to follow as she knows he is an avatar hybrid - a dreamwalker from the Sky People (humans). However, jellyfish-like creatures known as woodsprites briefly float on Jake, amazing Neytiri who explains that they are the seeds of Eywa, a spiritual and also physical biological entity that the Na'vi revere. Neytiri takes it as a sign that Jake may have a pure spirit and tells him to follow her. Jake is caught by her fellow Na’vi, one of them being [[Tsu'tey]], Neytiri's betrothed and next in line to be the clan leader. Neytiri defuses the situation by telling her clanmates that she witnessed a sign from Eywa, and this matter is for the clan's [[Tsahìk]].

Meeting [[Eytukan]] and [[Mo'at]], the leaders of the [[Omatikaya clan]], who are also Neytiri's parents, Jake presents himself as a warrior "dreamwalker", a term the Na’vi used to call the avatar hybrids, with his intention to learn from them. Eytukan and Mo’at agree to teach Jake, making a reluctant Neytiri his tutor. From that day on, Jake spends his time learning the ways and culture of the Na’vi warriors, while jumping back to his original human body to report to Parker and Quaritch on information regarding the Na'vi. Grace arranges the movement of the avatar team to a remote camp in the [[Hallelujah Mountains]] after finding out from Max Patel that Jake has been having regular communications with Quaritch about the Na'vi.

In his avatar form, Jake follows Tsu'tey, Neytiri, Saeyla and Ka'ani to Mons Veritatis. Here, he completes a rite of passage known as Iknimaya where he learns how to bond using his queue and control his flying [[mountain banshee]] whom he names Bob, while gaining respect and admiration from the Na’vi, his relationship with Neytiri continuing to grow, but also earning the jealousy and annoyance of Tsu'tey who begins to view Jake as stealing his future mate from him. Neytiri also tells Jake about the [[great leonopteryx]] as well as Toruk Makto, and how her great-great-grandfather was one of the few Na'vi able to ride one.

Jake becomes somewhat addicted to being an avatar, causing Grace to force his human body to keep eating so that he does not become anorexic. Grace tells Jake about how she taught the Na'vi children for ten years, including Neytiri and her sister Sylwanin, and how they viewed Grace like a mother. Grace reveals the RDA shot [[Sylwanin]] to death after she destroyed a bulldozer when she was angry about the RDA's deforestation. Because Grace was exiled from interacting with the clan due to this incident, Jake is able to persuade Mo'at and Eytukan to let Grace back in, causing her great happiness when she returns to the Hometree to reunite with her students.

Reporting back to Quaritch, the Colonel wants Jake to begin his plan to convince the clan to leave the Hometree, but Jake is now reluctant and wary of the RDA's desire to exploit the moon's resources. He tells Quaritch that he will attempt to convince the clan once he is made part of the People, a ceremony granting the greatest honor to an avatar. That night, Jake undergoes the ceremony where Eytukan considers him as one of their own and made part of the People, with Grace and Neytiri looking on. Jake is now part of the Omatikaya clan, and Neytiri takes Jake to the [[Tree of Voices]] where they hear the voices of her ancestors. Neytiri also explains he can choose to have a mate if he wishes, although his mate would also have to choose him as well. He and Neytiri choose each other and spend the night mating, and to the Na'vi, this means they are bonded for life. When Jake awakens as a human, he finds himself dumbfounded at his own actions, as he is now a couple with an alien.

When Jake and Neytiri awake, they encounter several bulldozers, sent by the RDA, destroying the nearby forests. In his attempt to stop them, Jake destroys one of the machine's camera arrays. Returning to the Hometree, Tsu'tey confronts him for mating with Neytiri. Before anything else can happen, Jake and Grace are suddenly sent back to their human bodies when soldiers sent by Quaritch arrive and open their link units to take them back by force. Quaritch and Parker have seen footage of Jake destroying the bulldozer's cameras and have checked his entry logs, indicating that the Na'vi refuse to leave their home. Grace tells Parker that the trees and plant life make up a huge network which connects the spiritual consciousness of all life, including the Na’vi, and must not be destroyed. Parker merely reacts with disbelief and thinks Grace has gone insane.

That night, Tsu'tey and other Na'vi set fire to the RDA bulldozers. In the morning, the RDA discovers the wreckage and sees that six of their men were killed by the Na'vi. Quaritch insists he will try a humane approach towards the evacuation of Hometree using tear gas which Parker approves. Grace is upset and she tells Jake how the RDA never cared about the Avatar Program and that they bulldozed a sacred site on purpose to initiate a war in order to justify further brute force. Trudy tells Grace about the impending Hometree evacuation, causing Grace to confront Parker about them using violent methods to potentially kill the Na'vi. Jake convinces Parker to give him and Grace a final chance to persuade the Na'vi.

#### Destruction of the Hometree

Jake and Grace return to their avatar forms, but the Na'vi refuse to listen after Jake reveals he was sent by his superiors to convince them to move. They are bound and labelled as traitors by the Na'vi who intend to defend themselves. A large strike force led by Quaritch attempts using tear gas first, but this causes the Na'vi to shoot back using arrows. In response, Quaritch authorizes incendiary rounds which topple Hometree to the ground, killing large numbers of the clan underneath. Mo’at releases Jake and Grace from their bonds and pleads them to save her clan. Eytukan is killed in the destruction when he's impaled by a large splinter of wood, leaving Neytiri devastated. She tearfully rejects Jake when he tries to comfort her. Back at the RDA, Parker tells his crew to deactivate the avatars, prompting a fight in the lab.

In the chaos, Jake and Grace are sent back to their original bodies to be placed under arrest for treason, along with Norm, who tried to stop the military from disabling their avatar forms. Max and Trudy, who are sympathetic to the Na'vi and brave enough to rebel against the RDA, rescue the avatar team from prison and flies them to safety, however Grace is shot by Quaritch when he attempts to stop them from leaving the colony. The team has the camp container holding the avatar transfer pods sent near the [[Tree of Souls]], where the remaining Omatikaya clan has fled to safety. Jake attempts to redeem himself in the eyes of the Na’vi and successfully tames and controls a great leonopteryx, making him the sixth Toruk Makto. Jake arrives to the clan on the creature, impressing Neytiri as it means he risked his life to aid the Na'vi.

Jake makes a plea to Mo’at to save Grace from dying. This is done by trying to have her consciousness transferred permanently into her avatar form, using the Tree of Souls, before her human body expires. However, it is too late, as Grace is too weak to be transferred. Before she dies, she tells Jake that she's seen Eywa and she does exist. Following Grace's death, he asks Tsu’tey, who has been made clan leader, and the entire clan to stand with him and face the humans. Having earned back the clan's trust, Jake makes plans to join with other clans to strike back at the human forces.

#### Battle of Ayram Alusing

Surveying the Na’vi, Quaritch learns that other clans have converged with the Omatikaya at the Tree of Souls and decides to destroy them and their holy ground to put an end to their defiance. The night before the battle, Jake prays to Ewya at the Tree of Souls to fight alongside the Na'vi, asking her to look into Grace's memories of Earth. Neytiri tells Jake that Eywa does not choose sides, protecting only the balance of life.

A huge military fleet commandeered by Quaritch approach the Tree of Souls, beginning the assault on the Tree of Souls. Among the fleet is one of the [[Valkyrie]] shuttles loaded with mining explosives as an improvised bomber. Thousands of Na’vi warriors led by Jake and Tsu’tey take to the skies and attack the fleet, causing huge losses on both sides. Neytiri is knocked off her banshee and flees the military ground forces, while Norm's avatar is shot, forcing him to jump back to his real body and continue the fight as a human. Tsu’tey makes a valiant attempt to take down the shuttle carrying the explosives but is shot and falls to the forest below. Trudy makes a valiant attempt to protect Jake from Quaritch's [Dragon](/c21) but is outgunned and killed.

When all things seem bleak, the native wildlife of Pandora strikes back in force, seemingly responding to Jake's earlier plea to Eywa for help. The ground and aerial troops are scattered by the wildlife, while the shuttle carrying the explosives is destroyed before it reaches the Tree of Souls. During the wildlife's attack on the ground, a thanator approaches Neytiri and offers itself as a new mount. She accepts by bonding with it.

Jake manages to bring down Quaritch's gunship, but the Colonel dons his [AMP suit](/amp) and escapes the ship's destruction. Finding the camp containing the avatar pods by chance, Quaritch attempts to destroy Jake's body but Neytiri and her thanator attack him. During a ferocious battle, Quaritch kills the thanator with his [AMP's combat knife](/amp-knife) and is about to kill Neytiri when Jake arrives to challenge him. Full of hatred at Jake, Quaritch refuses to give up the battle despite Jake's claim the RDA has already lost, and calls Jake a race traitor. As they fight, Jake destroys the AMP's life support and canopy but is caught in the mech's grip. Neytiri saves Jake by planting two arrows into Quaritch's chest, killing the Colonel.

he camp shack and Jake's avatar bed was damaged during Quaritch's attack and leaks deadly Pandoran air, leaving Jake's human body in danger. Jake wakes up in his human body and tries to grab the nearby rebreather unit, but he accidentally falls onto the floor and begins to suffocate. Neytiri is able to find Jake, but it appears he has already suffocated to death. She helps him put on his exopack, just managing to save his life before he perishes. At this moment, Jake says to Neytiri "I See you", the traditional Na'vi greeting. Neytiri sheds tears of joy and says it back to him. The words take on an entirely new meaning as she sees Jake is in his human form for the first time.

After the battle had ended in victory for the Na'vi, Tsu'tey is found bleeding heavily by a group of surviving Na'vi warriors who brought Jake and Neytiri to him. Tsu'tey, knowing that his death was imminent, passed on leadership of the Omatikaya clan to Jake before making him draw his knife and demanding that he end his suffering. Jake refused, but Tsu'tey proudly reassured him that he would be remembered because Jake, as Toruk Makto, would be his last shadow. He showed his respect for Jake by calling him a brother. Reluctantly, Jake granted Tsu'tey his last request and mercifully killed him. Jake then recited a prayer for Tsu'tey, wishing his spirit to become one with Eywa as Neytiri and the other warriors looked on in grief.

Having put an end to the military's attack, the Na'vi round up the remaining RDA personnel, which is approximately 90% of them, to be sent back to Earth. However, a select group will stay with them on Pandora, specifically the Na'vi sympathizers, which includes Jake, Norm, Max, the avatar team and many other RDA defectors. While on the RDA's way out, Selfridge briefly walks out of the line and approaches Jake. Although Neytiri draws her blade at Selfridge, Jake allows him to speak. Selfridge merely asks, "You know this isn't over?" but Jake does not answer, only giving him a look to keep walking.

Jake decides to stay in his avatar form forever and concludes his final entry video log of his experiences on his birthday. Returning to the Tree of Souls, he undergoes the consciousness transfer from his human body to his avatar form; Neytiri kisses his human body's shut eyelids. Jake then awakens to a new life as a Na'vi, showing he was able to pass through the eye of Eywa.
