_**Avatar: Fire and Ash**_ is the third installment in the _Avatar_ film series. It is a direct sequel to _[[Avatar: The Way of Water]]_ and may be followed by _Avatar 4_ if it is successful at the box office. The film is directed by James Cameron, produced by Cameron, Jon Landau, Jamie Landau, Rae Sanchini and Maria Battle-Campbell. The story is written by Cameron, Rick Jaffa, Amanda Silver, Josh Friedman, and Shane Salerno. The movie was released on December 19, 2025 in various 3D and 2D formats, including IMAX and Dolby Cinema.

_Fire and Ash_ follows the Sully family as they are threatened by an evil [[Na'vi]] villainess named [[Varang]] (Oona Chaplin), the leader of the [[Mangkwan Clan]], who have rejected [[Eywa]] and have allied with [[Miles Quaritch]] and the [[RDA]]. After [[Neteyam's]] death, [[Jake Sully]] (Sam Worthington) and [[Neytiri]] (Zoe Saldaña]) struggle to prevent further casualties among their friends and family during the Second Pandoran War. Meanwhile, [[Lo'ak]] strengthens his resolve to defend Payakan and the [[tulkun]] from their profit-based slaughter by the [[Resources Development Administration]]'s Cetacean Operations.

## Plot

The film begins with a dream sequence, in which [[Lo'ak]] and [[Neteyam]] are flying together on their [ikrans](/ikran). After a joyous ride, Neteyam asks Lo'ak how he died. Lo'ak tells him what happened, and Neteyam reassures Lo'ak that it was not his fault. Lo'ak then detaches from the [[Spirit Tree]].

Shortly after settling in with the [[Metkayina clan]], [[Jake Sully]] and [[Neytiri]] grapple with grief following the death their oldest son, [[Neteyam]]. Neytiri has developed deep hatred and racist feelings towards humans and everything that they have brought. Meanwhile, Jake and the group ([[Roxto]], [[Aonung]], [[Tsireya]], [[Lo'ak]], [[Kiri]] and [[Spider]]) have been scavenging assault rifles (mainly [[Recom M69-AR]]s) and other weaponry from the wreckage of the S-76 SeaDragon used in the Skirmish at the [[Three Brothers]], which upsets [[Tonowari]] and [[Ronal]] who feel that Jake shouldn't break one of the Three Laws of Eywa, which dictates that one shall not use metals from the ground, including the usage of firearms. They also tell Jake that he should return to being Toruk Makto, but he refuses, stating that 'When you ride the beast, you become the beast.'

Meanwhile, [Quaritch](/miles-quaritch) still seeks vengeance against Jake. [[Frances Ardmore]] is upset that the ship (S-76 SeaDragon) she lent to Quaritch was destroyed. Lo'ak and Tsireya also find Neytiri's bow in the wreckage, which originally belonged to her father [[Eytukan]], and consider repairing it, but Lo'ak claims that it is too ruined and buries it in the sand. Jake offers Neytiri explosive arrows (arrows with the rockets of [[M83 Rocket Launcher]]s mounted to the tip of them) but she rejects them. Lo'ak still blames himself for Neteyam's death and Jake starts doubting Eywa.

During one night, Spider has a frightening experience in which he nearly suffocates due to his [[exopack]] running low on oxygen and the Sully family having difficulty finding his spare one. Upon the arrival of flying merchant ships signaling the arrival of the [[Tlalim Clan]] (also known as 'The Wind Traders'), Jake and Neytiri suggest Spider tag along with the clan on his own to return to [[High Camp]], feeling he would be safer there with the allied humans of [[The Resistance]]. However, Kiri and Lo'ak protest and do not want to separate from Spider. Jake and Neytiri compromise by accompanying him on his way back to High Camp. [[Peylak]], the leader of the Wind Traders, agrees to transport Spider.

On the way, the trading ships convoy are swarmed and ambushed by an aggressive Na'vi clan, the [[Mangkwan Clan]] (also known as 'The Ash People'), led by their vicious Olo'eyktan and Tsahìk [[Varang]]. They attack the convoy with burning arrows, fire bombs and even a kamikaze attack. The Ash People loot the ship and sadistically kill the survivors. Neytiri is greatly injured by Varang and falls to the forest floor, with vines breaking her descent. Jake and the children survive but get separated and lose contact, but not before Lo'ak manages to shoot some Mangkwan warriors with a machine gun, even though his father previously did not allow him to use them, as he saw him as too irresponsible.

The [[RDA]] recently initiated a wide-range search for Jake, and his whereabouts are quickly found by Quaritch and [Wainfleet](/lyle-wainfleet), the two men being sent to arrest him. Additionally, Quaritch also wants to retrieve Spider. During Jake's search for the children and Neytiri, Quaritch and Wainfleet cross paths with him and corner him. They arrest him and plan on returning to [[Bridgehead]] City but start looking for Spider and the children, after Jake informed them about the Mangkwan and Spider having lost his backup oxygen mask, before his exopack runs out of oxygen. Meanwhile, Neytiri manages to pull herself on her ikran who brings her to High Camp, where her injuries are treated in their medical lab by her mother [[Mo'at]] and the other scientists led by [[Norm Spellman]].

Spider collapses from asphyxiation while him, Kiri, Lo'ak and Tuk are trying to escape the Ash People because his exopack has ran out of its charge. Kiri connects her queue to the ground and, based on intuition, places a [[woodsprite]] in his mouth and pushes it down his throat. After his body is enveloped with Eywa's vines, Spider gains the ability to breathe on [[Pandora]].

Eventually, they are trapped by the Ash People. Varang shows great interest in the technology of their firearms. Quaritch, Wainfleet and Jake arrive and observe the scene from afar. In order to free Spider, Quaritch agrees to work together with Jake, removes his handcuffs and even gives him a knife. They come out of hiding and Quaritch demonstrates the Mangkwan a machine gun. He is able to grab Varang and force the Ash People to put their weapons down, however, Varang is able to form a neural connection without him noticing and incapacitates Quaritch, which leads to the Ash People gaining the upper-hand again.

Quaritch is forced to teach Varang how to use a assault rifle. Using her power to connect with Eywa, Kiri commands a plant with projectile thorns to kill some of the fighters, enabling their escape. While the group is resting, Jake and Quaritch, although being enemies, have a friendly exchange in which Jake is trying to make him realize how dangerous the RDA is to Pandora and the Na'vi. In the morning, a group from High Camp including Tarsem, Norm, and Neytiri find Jake's group and they return to High Camp. Quaritch and Wainfleet are able to flee unnoticed and return to the RDA.

Spider's ability to breathe is now known by both the RDA and [[The Resistance]]. [[Parker Selfridge]] sees the value in abducting Spider to assist with the colonization of Pandora. After running some tests on Spider's body, High Camp scientists conclude that he has a mycelium organism planned inside his body which could be reverse engineered to allow every human to breathe on Pandora. It cannot be removed without risking Spider's life. During this time, Kiri learns from Mo'at and Jake that she is a clone of [[Grace Augustine]]'s avatar, and has no father. Now that Spider can breathe and realizing his safety is no longer guaranteed, Jake decides to return with his family and Spider back to [[Awa'atlu]], against Neytiri's arguments that he is a liability they should simply get rid of to avoid the risk.

On the [[Eastern Sea]], [[Mick Scoresby]] continues his [[tulkun]] hunting, Neytiri is further medically treated by [[Ronal]], and Spider links with an [[ilu]], as he has grown a queue. Everyone attends a council meeting with the tulkun, which concludes that [[Payakan]] should be outcasted for life again due to violating the Tulkun Way. Payakan flees in misery, and this angers Lo'ak who protests in front of the whole clan. In a heated argument, Jake suggests Lo'ak is at fault for Neteyam's death, prompting Lo'ak to run off and attempt suicide with a rifle in an isolated area. Lo'ak ultimately refrains, and Kiri and Tsireya find him and comfort him.

Quaritch interrogates other clans to find Spider's location to no avail, so him and Wainfleet travel to the [[Mangkwan village]], where Quaritch convinces them to join their side by supplying them with automatic weapons and flamethrowers. He promises that they will be able to dominate and subjugate any clan and any territory together. Quaritch and Varang begin a romantic relationship and they begin their search for Jake and Spider. Varang manages to extract information using her queue ability to torture a reef Na'vi.

#### Jake and Spider's Capture

At Awa'atlu, Tsireya and Lo'ak repair Neytiri's bow. Lo'ak gives it to his mother and she embraces him. Tsireya informs Lo'ak of a hint where Payakan could be, leading him to venture out to find Payakan on his own. Tsireya, [[Aonung]], and [[Rotxo]] decide to follow after Lo'ak. The adults in the village consider going after the children, but trust the kids will return.

While Spider and Kiri are alone in a forest and share their first kiss, they are found by Varang, Quaritch and Wainfleet, but Kiri escapes due to Spider luring them away. Spider gets captured and forcibly abducted. An RDA fleet including Quaritch, Wainfleet, Varang, and the Mangkwan army arrive at Awa'atlu. Jake surrenders himself after Quaritch commanded his troops to set fire to parts of the village and is, along with Spider, taken to Bridgehead.

There, Quaritch and Varang transfer Jake to Ardmore. Ardmore reluctantly allows the Mangkwan to reside at Bridgehead. Jake, however, faces execution by firing-squad for betraying the human race in the RDA's eyes. Jake is locked in a large glass cage, and Spider is researched by the RDA. Meanwhile, hundreds of tulkun are congregating for an annual spiritual ceremony called the Calf Communion which could bring substantial profit if they were hunted for the [[amrita]] in their brains that stops human aging and sells for massive profit. [[Ian Garvin]], a biologist working for the RDA opposes the plans but his protest is ignored. Soon after, Lo'ak and Tsireya's group finds Payakan and also another survivor of his clan, Ta'nok.

Wishing to save Jake, Neytiri disguises herself as a Mangkwan member and steals a special pager from one Mangkwan warrior, which allows her to enter and infiltrate Bridgehead undetected. She nearly kills Varang and obtains Jake's location from her, but Varang and Quaritch gain the upper hand and shoo her off. Neytiri also uses the explosive arrows from before to set off multiple explosions in Bridgehead. Ian Garvin steals a bulldozer and frees Jake from his cage. Meanwhile, Spider escapes his cell by unscrewing a panel using his father's dog tags. The RDA cannot afford to kill Spider due to the research potential, so he acts as a human shield to protect Jake as he runs through the base and they escape with Neytiri.

Jake, Neytiri and Spider find themselves alone by a stream. Jake suggests killing Spider due to the dangers of the rest of humanity obtaining the ability to breathe on Pandora. Jake takes Spider to a secluded part of the forest and sorrowfully considers killing him while assuring Spider that he loves him as a son, but ultimately refrains. It is implied that while washing her red paint off, Neytiri views it as blood on her hands which possibly reminds her of Neteyam and what he would have wanted, and realizes she is going down Varang's dark path. Neytiri rushes to prevent Jake killing Spider, and tells Spider "I See You", symbolizing her finally accepting him as a part of their family.

Jake becomes Toruk Makto again and prepares the clans for war, including [[Ikeyni]] of the [[Tayrangi clan]]. Back at Awa'atlu, the tulkun council hears Jake's warning of an incoming massacre but decides not to act as it is against their morals and the Tulkun Way. Lo'ak brings Payakan and the only survivor of a human attack on his clan, Ta'nok. After the youths and their spirit siblings threaten to be outcasted as they stand up for Payakan, the council reconsiders, ultimately agreeing to join the fight.

#### Battle at the Cove of the Ancestors

The next day, Ardmore fires Quaritch. A large fleet of human ships approaches the group of tulkun and are quickly decimated by both the Na'vi and the tulkun. Mangkwan on ikran attack the Metkayina and inflict heavy casualties, killing Rotxo. Ronal is injured, dying in childbirth, with Neytiri taking her baby, [[Pril]]. Jake gets hit by an arrow in the left leg. Varang and Quaritch arrive and hold Neytiri and Tuk captive. [[Mick Scoresby]], mastermind of the tulkun hunting operations, is drowned by the tulkun Ta'nok in the fight.

Kiri and Spider become a couple; they swim to the Spirit Tree and unlock Eywa's full power to control wildlife. [[Southern Squidrays]] appear and they use them to fight off the rest of the RDA submarines. Lo'ak provides covering fire, and Kiri also rescues Tuk and Neytiri from Varang aboard the [[Factory Ship]]. Kiri attaches her queue to Varang, frightening her away.

Meanwhile, the Factory Ship is caught in a magnetic field, the Flux Devil, after Jake's [[Great Leonopteryx]], acting on its own, flung a [[C-21 Dragon]] in the middle of it. This damaged the ship by disabling its engines and set it on fire. Without power, the ship drifts into the Flux Devil. Ardmore orders the crew to evacuate the ship, but they were seemingly unable to do so in time. Ardmore perished as the Flux's strength ripped the ship apart, exploding it. Jake, Quaritch and Spider find themselves on floating rocks.

Spider shoots Quaritch in the arm with a crossbow to protect Jake, but slips off a floating rock. Quaritch manages to catch him, and Jake pulls them both up. Neytiri and her group of Na'vi arrive, and she aims her bow at Quaritch. Preferring not for his Recom body to be killed in the same way as his human self, Quaritch jumps off the rock and into the inferno below, but with enough ambiguity for him to return later as his death is unseen.

In the final scene, Tsireya and Aonung watch their father connect their newborn sister Pril to the underwater Spirit Tree. Spider and the clan members connect themselves to the Spirit Tree, where in the Spirit World, he meets the memories of those who previously died, including [[Tsu'tey]], [[Eytukan]], Grace Augustine, Neteyam, Rotxo and Ronal. Kiri tells Spider his spirit will live in Eywa forever. They initiate and accept him as a Na'vi and one of the people. The camera zooms out, showing Eywa's neural network, the Oma, across Pandora.
