_**Avatar: The Way of Water**_ is the sequel to the 2009 film [[Avatar]], and the second installment in the Avatar series of five films. It was released on December 16, 2022 and directed by James Cameron, produced by Lightstorm Entertainment, and distributed by 20th Century Studios.

_The Way of Water_ is set about 15 years after the events of the first film. Due to a one-year time skip during the story, most of the film's events are set in 2170. Similar to the first film, the story is set across several months with only the most important scenes being shown.

_The Way of Water_ follows the journey of [[Jake Sully]] and [[Neytiri]]'s newfound family of children. Despite their best efforts to keep their family safe, a familiar threat resurfaces because Earth is dying, and forces the family to become refugees and flee to the land of the [[Metkayina clan]] in the [[Pandoran]] oceans. Here, [[Lo'ak]] (Jake and Neytiri's younger son) befriends an exiled sea animal named Payakan. However, Lo'ak discovers Payakan is in danger from a group of hunters who view him as a commodity to be exploited. Lo'ak must face the struggles that come with saving Payakan and his whale-like species, the [[tulkun]], from slaughter.

The film's plot is intended to be a fully encapsulated standalone narrative, as will the other sequels, but will also be part of a meta-narrative that extends across its sequels _[[Avatar: Fire and Ash]]_, _Avatar 4_ and _Avatar 5_.

## Plot

#### Family life

After the events of the First Pandoran War, [[Jake Sully]] has been living a peaceful life at the [[Omatikaya village]] as the olo'eyktan of the clan and raising a family with his mate [[Neytiri]], which includes his sons [[Neteyam]] and [[Lo'ak]], his daughter [[Tuktirey]], and his adopted daughter [[Kiri]] (born from [[Grace Augustine]]'s comatose avatar).

His kids grow up alongside a human boy named [Miles "Spider" Socorro](/spider), the son of [[Miles Quaritch]], born on [[Pandora]] but was unable to be transported to Earth due to being too young for a cryocapsule. While Jake is able to accept Spider being involved with his family "like a stray cat", Neytiri is distrustful of him given his human origins, believing he should be with his own species. However, despite being human, Spider does not embrace his human heritage and feels more inclined to [[Na'vi]] culture and traditions.

#### Return of the RDA

During one of Jake and Neytiri's date nights in 2168, they notice what they believe is a new star in the night sky. To their horror, they realize it signals the return of humans to Pandora. In response to the fall of [[Hell's Gate]], the [[RDA]] have arrived with an armada of ten [interstellar vehicles](/iv).

On the cusp of dawn approaching the Omatikaya territory, the RDA invade Pandora. To clear the landing zone for building, the ISVs enter the atmosphere and use their giant plasma engines to slow their descent to the ground, intentionally creating devastating firestorms that burn a 20km radius of forest and all the animals within it. The ISVs then drop landing modules via sling load. These 30-story tall cargo containers are each full of thousands of RDA workers, [[SecOps]] forces, and construction equipment such as massive dozers and building robots. As the blaze rages on into early daylight, after reaching the top of a mountain, Jake and Neytiri sorrowfully witness the devastation from afar.

#### One year later

A one-year time jump occurs, bringing the audience into the year of 2169 or 2170. During that year timeframe, the RDA used fabrication plants and construction robots to build a coastal installation known as [[Bridgehead]] City; making more progress in a single year than in the previous thirty years of RDA activity on Pandora from 2124 to 2154.

A new ISV has just arrived to deliver more personnel and equipment; among the new arrivals to Pandora is Project Phoenix's first Recombinant squad consisting of the previously deceased [[Miles Quaritch]] and eleven of his former troopers having been cloned into Recombinant bodies. Recom Quaritch is the fifth to be decanted and awakened. Upon awakening, seeing recom [[Lyle Wainfleet]] was an unwelcome shock, causing him to react very violently and needing to be restrained by fellow recoms. After recognizing his team, recom Quaritch settles down. He then inspects himself in a mirror, having found himself in the body of the 'enemy' species.

After having dressed, while more recoms are being decanted, recom Quaritch accompanied by recom Wainfleet watch a video log made by the original Colonel Miles Quaritch (helped along by administrator [[Parker Selfridge]]) which explains that as his clone, he possesses all of his memories up until two hours prior to his departure for the Battle of Ayram Alusìng, and as such, won't remember his death. Human Quaritch is adamant that he won't die, however theorizes that if he does, that he assumes that Jake Sully may have had something to do with it.

Meanwhile on the exomoon, to prevent the RDA from exploiting Pandora again, over the past year Jake has led an ongoing strategic guerrilla warfare operation aimed at weakening RDA supply lines and outlying sites. Their current mission is a raid on a maglev train. Jake's sons are a part of the raid, assigned as spotters. After the war party derails the train and Jake and Neytiri take out both protection escort aircraft, the warriors (directed by [[Norm Spellman]] in his avatar) begin to gather the weapons supplies from the wreckage.

Lo'ak, wanting to be a part of the action, disobeys Jake's orders and recklessly flies down to the wreck, collecting a weapon. Neteyam, aggravated by this, follows after his brother to try to wrangle him. However, when more RDA forces arrive in a Kestrel gunship, Lo'ak and Neteyam are caught in a blast, which injures Neteyam. Jake rushes over to rescue both of his sons, finding Lo'ak first and sends him away. After the scare of finding a warrior's dead body, Jake finds Neteyam alive. He quickly checks him for severe injuries, admonishing Neteyam for being there. Jake then lifts Neteyam into a fireman's carry and runs away.

Back on the ISV in orbit, recom Quaritch has gathered his entire squad in a revolving module that provides gravity. Inspired by the video log, recom Quaritch seeks vengeance for his human death. He briefs his recom squad of their first mission; having taken it upon himself to decide that mission should be to hunt down and kill Jake.

As a result of fighting back against the RDA, the Omatikaya clan and other human resistance members have since moved away from the forest up to [[High Camp]] for safety; a hidden stronghold located within the [[Hallelujah Mountains]] inside the cavern of one of the larger floating mountains. There, Kiri is helping Spider paint blue stripes on his body with spartan fruit dye while Tuk walks around the settlement playing with a wooden toruk toy. As the war party returns, Tuk rushes over to notify Kiri and Spider, encouraging them to follow her in greeting their returning family members.

After the returning Sullys dismount from their ikran, Jake disciplines both of his sons for disobeying direct orders. Kiri and Tuk arrive and begin to inspect their brother's injuries as Spider begins tending to the ikran. The girls are quickly sent away by Jake to help their grandmother tend to the wounded. With Neytiri pointing out Neteyam's injuries, Jake dismisses him to get patched up, leaving Lo'ak the sole target of Jake's ire. Jake voices the severity of Lo'ak's actions having almost caused his brother to be killed, and as a punishment, grounds Lo'ak from flying his ikran for one month. Jake then orders Lo'ak to see to all of the ikran's needs.

That night, while Neteyam's wounds are being tended to by his grandmother [[Mo'at]] and Kiri, assisted by Tuk, Jake is cleaning his field stripped weapon. Neytiri calmly addresses to Jake how it is hard on their sons to try to live up to him, and how Jake himself is hard on them. Jake instead comments being hard on them is his role as a father. She reminds Jake that they are not a squad, but a family. Jake then admits that he thought they had lost both of them during the raid, explaining his anger earlier.

Afterward, Lo’ak, Kiri, and Spider pass through the avatar's sleeping quarters to visit the High Camp Biolab, a large ex-RDA lab module that has been relocated to the floating mountain stronghold. Inside, four avatar drivers, including Norm, disengage from their link units. Max Patel assists Norm while the three teens enter the biolab. As Spider and Lo'ak talk to Max and Norm, Spider requesting from Norm to have his own avatar, Kiri breaks away to visit her biological mother; [[Grace Augustine]]'s invitro avatar floating in an amnio tank. Kiri hops onto the tank to greet Grace’s avatar warmly as "ma" and then gives the tank a hug.

Some time passes, and Kiri is now watching Grace's video log #351 that was recorded at [[Site 26]] just days before her death. Spider and Lo'ak have now joined her, also watching some of Grace's video log. The boys then joke and tease Kiri about who her unknown father could be. The topic of 'fathers' then becomes a sore spot for Spider, as he laments about who his father was. Lo'ak and Kiri try to reassure him.

#### Testing Eywa's "Immune Response"

Two days later, the first recom squad arrive on a [[Valkyrie]] shuttle at Bridgehead, where an aid introduces recom Quaritch and recom Wainfleet to General [[Frances Ardmore]] as she trains in a [[skel suit]]. Ardmore then gives both recom leaders a quick tour and brief history of the installation, explaining the RDA's current goal of making Pandora the "new home for humanity" because the Earth is dying. The trio end up in a command center with RDA administrator Charles Stringer. Stringer and Ardmore bring up footage of Jake's attack on the maglev train. His increased boldness and frequency of attacks has become troublesome, however every time the RDA attempt to retaliate by going after Jake's encampment they take losses due to Pandora's "immune response" protecting the Hallelujah Mountains. She hopes that the Recombinants will be able to bypass the "immune system", and decides to test the theory "the hard way".

During a playful venture in the forest to the old battlefield, the curfew to return home for the impending eclipse causes Lo'ak, Tuk, Kiri, and Spider to backtrack towards High Camp. As they make their way, Lo'ak spots large shoe prints in the soft mud. He then decides to track the footprints, leading him and the others to the old link shack where the Recoms are presently investigating. Recom Quaritch grimly discovered his decomposed remains, pierced with Neytiri's distinctive arrows, and crushes his own skull. An observant Lo'ak spots the Recoms, and quickly radios his father to inform him of their location. However, a skirmish occurs, and the Recoms easily capture Jake's children. They identify the children as Jake's due to Lo'ak and Kiri having recessive human traits such as five fingers, and upon learning Spider's name, recom Quaritch recognizes the boy as his former son.

Jake, Neytiri and Neteyam rush to the link shack, which was located at [[Site 26]] 15 years earlier. Upon arrival, Jake tells Neteyam to hang back. The parents then make animal calls to alert the captured children to their impending rescue. As Neytiri provides overwatch, Jake stealthily kills recom Warren. When Neytiri sees recom Fike threatening Kiri, she is forced to kill him and recom Walker with arrows, alerting Quaritch to her presence and covering the children's escape. When the other recoms attempt to flank Neytiri, Jake ambushes and kills recom Brown, and Neteyam disobeys Jake and saves his mother's life by killing recom Zhang. Jake and Neteyam regroup with Neytiri and his other children, but Spider trips and falls to the forest floor, where he is abducted by recom Quaritch. The recoms then retreat to Ardmore's command ship for extraction.

At Bridgehead, RDA scientists unsuccessfully attempt to coerce information about Jake from Spider via mental torture with a NeuroSect. Changing tack, recom Quaritch attempts the "personal angle" by utilizing the fact that he's a clone of Spider's father. He makes an offer to Spider to simply "ride along" with him to avoid further torture. Although uncooperative, and unaware of recom Quaritch's assassination mission, Spider does grudgingly agree. With Spider's goading, the Recoms are eventually able to successfully bond with [[ikran]] mounts.

Knowing the danger Spider's knowledge poses to their safety, and also to avoid further persecution of the Omatikaya clan, Jake convinces a reluctant Neytiri and his children to banish themselves and retreat to the eastern seaboard archipelago and the village of [[Awa'atlu]], a coral reef island and home to the [[Metkayina clan]], whose lifestyle is adapted to an aquatic habitat. Jake passes on his chief mantle to his successor, Tarsem, and leaves with his family on ikran to fly to the reefs.

#### Living at Awa'atlu

They are greeted by the clan chief [[Tonowari]] and his partner, the [[tsahik]] [[Ronal]], who is doubtful of them initially as she blames fall of Hell's Gate for the renewed human expansion. However, Jake stresses their dire situation, and according to custom Tonowari agrees for the Sully family to stay and receive shelter. Although at first Tonowari's and Ronal's son [[Aonung]] and his friend [[Rotxo]] deride the Sully children for their thin arms and small tails, and particularly Lo'ak and Kiri for their human genetic traits, the family quickly learn the ways of the reef people.

Kiri is fascinated with the aquatic life of Awa'atlu and develops a spiritual bond with the sea and its creatures, while Lo'ak befriends [[Tsireya]], the daughter of Tonowari and Ronal and sister of Aonung. Jake and Neytiri themselves try to adapt and learn the skills of the Metkayina, with Jake eventually managing to bond with a [[tsurak]], a mount resembling a large flying-fish that can dive underwater or flit just above the surface.

While adapting to their new environment, Lo'ak gets into a fight with Aonung and his friends when they make crude comments about his and Kiri's mixed human lineage. Jake admonishes his son for his behavior. At Jake's insistence, Lo'ak returns to apologize to Aonung and his friends. However, they entice him to a trip to the [[Three Brothers]] island chain, which is the hunting territory of a dangerous sea predator called an [[akula]], and then leave him stranded as a revenge. The akula attacks Lo'ak, and he nearly drowns, but is saved at the last moment by a tulkun, an intelligent and pacifistic cetacean species whom the Metkayina consider their spiritual family. A grateful Lo'ak removes a human-made steel tag from one of the tulkun's fins, and notices that he is missing his fin on the other side. He spends time with the tulkun and learns that he is able to communicate with it; eventually they become friends.

Back at Awa'atlu, Jake asks Kiri why she seems upset. She confides that she feels different; that she can sense a connection to Eywa, and can sense her heartbeat, which she describes as "mighty". Jake reassures her that there is nothing wrong with her. When Lo'ak returns to the village that night, Tonowari asks Aonung to apologize to Lo'ak for taking him beyond the reef. However, Lo'ak decides to take the blame for breaking the rules, which wins Aonung's friendship and respect.

Together, the group of children learn and explore Awa'atlu's aquatic shores, its beautiful ecosystem and the Na'vi sign language. Lo'ak tells Tsireya and the others about the tulkun who saved him, only to be warned that he is [[Payakan]], a tulkun who was cast out for murder, which Lo'ak refuses to believe. On a trip to the Metkayina's [[Cove of the Ancestors]], the children are introduced to the [[Spirit Tree]], their equivalent of the Tree of Souls. Kiri sees a vision of her mother, but then suffers a sudden violent seizure. She is eventually healed by Ronal, but as Jake had called Norm and Max for help, recom Quaritch was able to track their Samson's coordinates to the larger archipelago surrounding where the reef people live.

Bringing Spider with him once more, recom Quaritch commandeers a SeaDragon whaling carrier vessel from RDA Cet-Ops Captain [[Mick Scoresby]]. The SeaDragon is capable of deploying a small fleet of gunboats, subs and VTOLs and is hunting tulkun to harvest [[amrita]], a brain enzyme used to create anti-aging remedies. recom Quaritch begins to violently question the local clans about Jake's location, specifically the [[Ta'unui clan]], using Spider as a translator who pleads with him not to kill the [[tsahik]]. The clan claims they have no knowledge of Jake's location, prompting recom Quaritch to order the burning of the village instead. After, recom Quaritch orders the whaling crew to wantonly hunt and kill tulkun in order to draw Jake out. Spider is disgusted with the RDA's brutality and his father's complicity.

Scoresby's fleet hunts the tulkun pod that is tied to the Metkayina, piercing their fins with inflatable balloons to keep them on the surface, and shooting their less-armored underbellies with explosive harpoons to kill them. Scoresby personally catches and kills Ronal's "soul-sister" Ro'a, after which the RDA marine biologist Dr. [[Ian Garvin]] harvests her corpse for a tiny amount of valuable amrita. The whalers also ruthlessly kill Ro'a's calf.

Lo'ak, determined to find the reason why Payakan became an outcast, returns to the Three Brothers and mentally links with Payakan via his queue. He learns that the tulkun was driven out by his pod because he went against the pacifist ways of his species and attacked the RDA whalers who had killed his mother. Lo'ak feels great pity and empathy for Payakan after this revelation, as the rebellious Lo'ak also feels like an outcast among his family, and that he lives in Neteyam's shadow.

Lo'ak returns to the village where Ronal chastises Tsireya for allowing Lo'ak to bond with the outcast. Tonowari also scolds Lo'ak, saying he should know better. Lo'ak instead replies that Payakan saved his life and that he does not truly know him. Tonowari demands everyone sit down and explains the tulkun way and why Payakan is outcasted. Lo'ak instead speaks out against this, saying Tonowari is wrong. An upset Jake grabs Lo'ak and takes him away. Later, Tsireya tells Lo'ak how proud she is of him for bonding with a tulkun. Lo'ak defends Payakan to her, though she replies that by the Tulkun Way, Payakan bears the deaths. Tsireya insists they try to convince Tonowari, but Lo'ak refuses, saying neither of their fathers understand them. Tsireya tells Lo'ak "I see you" and insists he is part of their clan.

When the Metkayina learn of the tulkun slaughters, they become furious and prepare to wage war with the RDA. Tonowari, who is displeased with the growing situation with recom Quaritch, is advised by Jake to strategize their defenses and to call him if any tulkun are found with tracking tags, as this is a death sentence. Learning of the situation, Lo'ak takes off on an ilu to warn Payakan, followed by his siblings and the Metkayina kids.

#### Skirmish at the Three Brothers

The group finds Payakan at the Three Brothers, being chased by the SeaDragon and Scoresby's jetboat fleet, as he has already been tagged again. Lo'ak warns his father of the situation via radio, and the kids manage to free Payakan from the tracking device, but recom Quaritch spots them and Scoresby's jetboats enter the water in pursuit. As Neteyam attempts to use the tracking device to lure the fleet away, the other kids begin hiding below the surface. Multiple [Mako](/mako) subs and [Crab Suit](/crab-suit) operators deploy into the sea, using their weaponry to disable the kids' ilu mounts. Lo'ak, Tsireya and Tuk are eventually captured by a Mako sub using a net, which is lifted out of the sea by recom Quaritch's ikran and brought aboard the RDA carrier. The other kids continue to be pursued.

Jake, Neytiri and the Metkayina clan arrive at the Three Brothers on their tsuraks to confront the RDA fleet, seeing the kids cuffed to the deck railing. Before the battle, recom Quaritch contacts Jake by radio and gives him an ultimatum to surrender or risk having his children killed. Ronal admonishes Jake for being the reason that the battle has reached the Metkayina. Realizing that the battle was always between himself and recom Quaritch, Jake decides to surrender to avoid further bloodshed on Pandora. However, seeing his friend Lo'ak imperiled, Payakan rushes towards the SeaDragon. He leaps out of the water, slamming down on its foredeck and killing recom Ja and some of the RDA crew. From his nearby [[Matador]] gunboat, the enraged Scoresby fires an explosive harpoon at Payakan, who uses his hardened skull to deflect the shot which instead damages the SeaDragon.

Jake and the Metkayina clan choose this moment to attack the RDA fleet, using spears and arrows to pick apart the crews of the five [[Picador]] jetboats from the backs of tsuraks. Jake manages to destroy two of the boats, exploding one and causing the other to violently run aground. Neytiri swoops down on the back of her ikran, killing recom Lopez as well as shooting down [[Seawasp]]s, one of which crash-lands onto the SeaDragon's top deck.

Below the surface, a Mako sub continues to pursue Kiri, Aonung and Rotxo. Kiri calls on her bond with Eywa to control undersea flora and fauna, using it to disable the sub and smother the evacuating operators. Above, Payakan swipes a passing jetboat with his tail, sending it tumbling into one of the SeaDragon's tilt-rotors and critically damaging the larger vessel; in the chaos Spider, who is still hostile to his RDA captors, sabotages the carrier's helm controls and causes it to accelerate uncontrolled towards nearby reef. It barrels over them, landing hard, immobilized and immediately beginning to sink.

As Jake's tsurak manages to knock recom Quaritch off his banshee into the sea, Scoresby tries to snare Payakan with a harpoon cable, but the highly intelligent tulkun manages to manipulate the cable and wrap around the Matador, dragging its belly over nearby rocks and pinning Scoresby to his gunner's platform by his arm. Dr. Garvin hits the deck, as the immense pressure Payakan puts on the gunboat eventually causes the cable to tear the gunner's platform off the boat, severing Scoreby's arm (much as the whalers had severed Payakan's fin) and hurling him screaming into the sea.

Neteyam reappears, leaping onto the SeaDragon from his ilu to free Lo'ak, Tuk and Tsireya. The girls jump into the sea and begin to swim away. However, Lo'ak takes a rifle from Brown's body, refusing to leave without saving Spider. Kiri, Aonung and Rotxo surface nearby, only for recom Wainfleet to swoop in on his banshee and snatch Kiri out of the sea, carrying her back onto the deck of the SeaDragon. Seeing this, Tuk and Tsireya turn back and also climb back on board the foundering vessel. They find Kiri cuffed to the railing of the moon pool, but before they can free her, recom Quaritch and Wainfleet reappear. Recom Quaritch knocks Tsireya into the moon pool, where she swims away to safety, and recom Wainfleet cuffs Tuk to the railing next to Kiri.

Soon after, Lo'ak and Neteyam find Spider and incapacitate his guards; Lo'ak is forced to shoot and kill an RDA soldier during the rescue, which leaves him shaken. Neteyam takes the gun from Lo'ak and hurries him and Spider to dive into the sea but is mortally shot by recom Wainfleet as he covers their escape. On nearby rocks, Jake and Neytiri try to save Neteyam's life, but as Pandora enters its daily eclipse and the sky darkens, Neteyam succumbs to his wound in their arms, leaving the Sully family in grief.

Jake decides to face recom Quaritch once and for all, when the latter radios to reveal that he has recaptured Tuk and Kiri. Jake helps motivate Neytiri to rescue their daughters and tells her she must have a strong heart. Jake and Neytiri stealthily climb to the top deck of the SeaDragon, with Spider leading them due to his knowledge of the vessel. Jake uses a grenade to detonate the crashed Seawasp, killing many of the remaining RDA troops and evacuees. In the chaos, Jake and Neytiri attack the survivors on the top deck, killing recoms Prager and Zdinarsik before working their way down to the moon pool where Tuk and Kiri are held.

Recom Wainfleet commands recom Mansk and the remaining soldiers on the lower deck, but Jake beats both recombinants unconscious and knocks recom Wainfleet into the sea. Spider watches from cover as Neytiri slaughters the last human troops in a berserker rage, breaking her bow before killing the last unarmed, cowering soldier. Jake cuts off Kiri and Tuk's cuffs before engaging recom Quaritch in a fistfight that ends with the recom snatching Kiri at knifepoint. However, Neytiri intercedes, similarly holding Spider at knifepoint. At first, recom Quaritch claims his son is inconsequential, but he ultimately releases Kiri when Neytiri cuts Spider's chest. Recom Quaritch and Jake resume fighting, and Jake gets the upper hand.

Due to the many explosions and fires, the SeaDragon quickly begins to sink with Spider, recom Quaritch and the Sully family trapped inside. Jake strangles recom Quaritch into unconsciousness and is almost drowned himself. However, he is rescued by Lo'ak and Payakan. Kiri uses her bond with Eywa to summon a [[gill mantle]] and bioluminescent [[squid lantern]]s that help her save Neytiri and Tuk, and which then guide the entire family to the surface. Spider, who has been searching the sinking vessel for Jake, finds drowning recom Quaritch. He is initially hesitant to save him, however, begrudgingly rescues him, bringing him up to the surface and leaving him on nearby rocks where he regains consciousness. Recom Quaritch begs Spider to come with him. However, Spider rejects this and returns to the Sully family thrus leaving a badly injured recom Quaritch returning back to Bridgehead, much to his dismay.

#### Epilogue

In the aftermath, Jake and his family sorrowfully conduct Neteyam's funeral according to Metkayina customs and lay his body to rest in the Cove of the Ancestors where it is absorbed by the Spirit Tree. Jake then proceeds to inform Tonowari and Ronal of his decision to leave the reef and move far away. Tonowari, however, respectfully identifies him as part of the Metkayina Clan and welcomes his family to stay. Humbled, Jake vows that he and his family will defend Awa'atlu, their new home.

Neteyam's memory is then visited within Eywa's spirit world by his parents at the Spirit Tree. Neteyam's memory is unaware of his death and wonders why Jake is weeping. Wishing for the two of them to be able to enjoy a peaceful moment together, Jake only replies that he is simply happy to see him. Neytiri watches Jake and Neteyam from afar and weeps. Jake then has an epiphany about how he can no longer run away from the RDA and must fight them.
