The _**C-21 Dragon**_, also called the **Dragon Assault Ship** (Na'vi name: **Kunsìp apxa** meaning "large gunship"), **Dragon Gunship**, **Drag Ass** and **Killer Diller**, is a quad-tiltrotor VTOL heavy transport and assault aircraft used by the [[RDA]] for full-scale military operations against the [[Na'vi]], or as support during small incursions into otherwise hostile territory teeming with vicious megafauna and flora. Combining heavy armor, devastating firepower, and a large cargo bay for additional room for cargo or forces, the Dragon is the RDA's most powerful non-nuclear weapon on [[Pandora]].

The RDA only had one operational Dragon at the time of the first film, though there was a second Dragon airframe on Pandora, but most of the main components hadn't arrived from [[Earth]]. Quaritch coordinated the RDA's assault on the [[Omatikaya Hometree]] and the [[Battle of Ayram Alusìng]] from the Dragon Gunship. It was eventually destroyed by [[Jake Sully]].

## Specifications

### Design

Compared to both the [[SA-2 Samson]] and [[AT-99 Scorpion]], the Dragon is significantly larger, slower, and less maneuverable. However, with its panoply of heavy machine guns, dozens of rocket and missile pods, and possible complement of door-gunners, it can function as an excellent lead gunship when mainline Scorpions are not around or available. To prevent potentially catastrophic friendly-fire incidents resulting from careless use of such firepower, all but the door guns are constrained by friendly fire IFF (Identification Friend or Foe) avoidance codes for safety.

The Dragon can also be used as a cargo and troop transport and air assault transport, utilizing its lifting ability to carry and deploy up to ten AMP suits, up to 30 armed soldiers with their supplies and equipment, or massive explosive payloads.

A unique design quirk of the Dragon is its two cockpits. The primary cockpit is situated in the center of the aircraft and is used for control of the aircraft. The secondary command cockpit is situated on the right side of the aircraft and is in charge of the ship's vast array of weapons and sensors, allowing the Dragon to command a large fleet of friendly assets. The command cockpit also has some redundant pilot controls for maneuvering.

### Weaponry

The Dragon is a heavily armed gunship carrying ten [[TK-411 WAFAR]] air-to-ground rocket pods, two [[Hawkeye HELLFIRE]] missile pods, four 9x2 incendiary [[AG-MFM 332]] missile pods, sixteen autocannons (four dual-linked and two quad-linked), two 6x2 grenade launcher pods that can be loaded with gas canisters, four additional rocket pods, plus two dual and two quad automatic rotary gun turrets.

All gun and missile systems are constrained by Friendly Fire Avoidance Codes (IFF Lockout). The air-to-ground missiles and rocket pods are mounted on three huge stub pylons at each side, which are all in a symmetrical set.

Rather than aiming manually, a human gunner indicate targets and delegate tasks to the multiple gun and missile systems, which then execute orders accordingly.

A flamethrower can be added to the Dragon’s arsenal by mounting it beneath the cockpit, but this comes at the expense of the dual 50mm sentry-guns turret normally located there. This flamethrower is notably used during the capture of Jake Sully by the RDA.