The _**exopack**_ is a lightweight atmosphere filtration system developed from civilian rebreather technology that allows humans to survive on [[Pandora]] with a minimum amount of equipment.

Some humans use exopacks for fieldwork in the Eastern Dead Zones of [[Earth]].

## Purpose and usage


Pandora's toxic atmosphere is unbreathable by humans due to the presence of high concentrations of carbon dioxide (>18%) and hydrogen sulfide (<1%). Pandora's other main atmospheric constituents; nitrogen, oxygen, and xenon, are also present in Earth's atmosphere. Pandora's atmospheric oxygen content and its partial pressure (pO2) are suitable to support human life. Thus, in order for a human to breathe, it is only necessary to filter out the toxic components, which is the exopack's purpose.

The exopack utitilizes a full-face, transparent, perspex faceplate with a polymer static seal, which is connected by a hose to a small pack containing the filters and a power supply. There is a high-flow valve at the bottom of the mask, allowing the user taking deep breaths rapidly if necessary, especially if they were exposed to Pandora's atmosphere for a period of time.

The filters function for two weeks before accumulated soot clogs the filter pores. The filter pads can be regenerated by gentle washing with running water and last indefinitely with proper care.

Multiple different versions of the exopack exist. Some versions allow the wearer to breathe underwater for a limited time and have an integrated HUD to display the system's status.

For emergencies there are several devices with the same purpose as the exopack, such as the emergency oxygen supply and the standby rebreather.

Older versions of the mask had to be refilled at oxygen pods.