__**Doctor Grace Augustine**__ (Na'vi name: **Kìreysì**) is a major supporting character in [Avatar](/avatar) and the protagonist of the [[Avatar: Adapt or Die]] comic series. She was one of the original 20 avatar drivers.

Grace worked for the [[RDA]] as an xenobotanist and xenoanthropologist in charge of the [[Avatar Program]]. She was fascinated by the Na'vi and empathized with their plight. She was a legend to the scientific personnel as the author of a comprehensive book on [[Pandora]]'s plants. She was responsible for bridging a peace with the [[Omatikaya clan]] and established a school where the clan could interact with humans up until its closure in 2152.

In 2154, she tutored [[Jake Sully]] on the Avatar Program. Having arrived on Pandora three decades before him, Grace was reluctant to accept him on her team due to his lack of training and qualifications for the program. Due to Jake's presence, relations with the Omatikaya clan improved and Grace was allowed back into the village.

After the [[Omatikaya Hometree]] was destroyed, Grace, Jake, and [[Norm Spellman]] escaped [[Hell's Gate]] in an effort to help the Na'vi, but not before Colonel Quaritch fatally wounded Grace while firing at the Samson that they were escaping in. Jake brought her human form to [[Mo'at]] at the [[Tree of Souls]], in the hope that they could transfer her consciousness into her avatar form, but she was rendered too weak by her wounds and the transfer failed. Before she died, she told Jake that she was with [[Eywa]].

Despite her death, her dormant avatar gave birth to a daughter named [[Kiri]], who was adopted as a newborn by Jake and [[Neytiri]].

## Biography

### Arrival of the New Avatar Drivers

During the evening on May 19, 2154, Grace had just exited her link unit number four when she was introduced by Dr. [[Max Patel]], the technical support officer, to both of the two new additions to the avatar team whom had just arrive via the [[ISV Venture Star]]; Dr. [[Norm Spellman]], a xenoanthropologist, and [[Jake Sully]], a genetic stand-in for his deceased twin brother, Dr. [[Tom Sully]]. Grace, though friendly and direct with Norm, was particularly sharp with Jake, as he admitted to being scientifically incompetent, and whom she saw as an attempt by Selfridge and SecOps to militarily hijack her program.

Grace made it very evident that she was highly displeased and somewhat angered with this last minute switch up (having assumedly only just found out about it moments prior to having met Jake in person). Though Max tried and failed to advise her against it, Grace stomped away, leaving the SciOps module to go to the Ops center to seek out RDA administrator Parker Selfridge. Grace expresses her annoyance and frustration about the situation to him, as she was in need of a capable researcher, not a former Marine who knew absolutely nothing and could potentially worsen human-Na'vi relations. Grace's negative attitude irritates Selfridge, to which he reminds her that the only reason the RDA are on Pandora is to mine [[unobtanium]] (the material that funds her science), and as such orders Grace to work with what she currently has to find a diplomatic solution to keep the peace between the RDA and the Na'vi.

The following morning of May 20, Grace and Max lead Jake and Norm through their first link with their avatars. Grace puts Norm in link unit number two and Jake in link unit number three. After calibrating and initiating Jake's link, she temporarily walks over to the observation window to peer at their freshly decanted avatars before quickly going over to her link unit number four to connect with her own avatar. Grace awakens in the longhouse and presumably quickly changes her outfit from her night clothes into her day clothes.

After exiting down the front stairs, she sees Jake in the nearby garden and calls out to him. Her avatar's much younger, athletic, and attractive appearance surprises Jake. She smiles and crosses over a raised garden bed to be on the same row as him, jauntily walking towards him before deciding to immediately test his motor control skills by picking and tossing a spartan fruit towards him. He easily catches the fruit and without hesitation brings the fruit to his mouth, to which he gloriously enjoys biting into it; eating the fruit's juicy flesh with a childlike glee. Unlike the other avatar staff who are upset at Jake for not following medical protocols for new avatar drivers upon first link, Grace appears happy to see him this quickly and this far away outside. She is impressed with his physical ability, giving a hum of appraisement.

That evening, Grace oversaw the coordination of putting all the avatars to bed and the securing of the longhouse. After having changed clothes to get ready for bed, as she walked by Jake's bunk, she noticed Jake inquisitively looking at the delicate moving tendrils located at the end of his braided kuru. She implored Jake to not play with it, indicating that his sensitive neural queue could be damaged and should be left alone. After Grace somewhat playfully shoos the human scientists out of the large wooden building, Grace closes and locks the metal gate then flips the light switch off, telling the drivers that she will see them at dinner. Upon exiting her link, Grace is yet again disappointed at having returned to her human body.

### First Expedition with the New Avatars

After breakfast the next morning on May 21, Grace takes Norm and Jake out on a routine expedition to gather samples of Pandoran plant life. During their flight onboard Samson 16, the pilot Captain Trudy Chacón alerts Grace to a [[sturmbeest]] herd. Grace thanks her and then points out to Norm the bull, a dozen cows, and some juveniles. After eventually arriving near their destination and landing in a small clearing, Grace unbuckles her seatbelt and quickly hops out of the Samson, signaling to Trudy through the cockpit window to turn off the engines as she plans for them to stay in the area for a while. She then reminds Norm to grab his backpack from the Samson and orders protection escort Corporal [[Lyle Wainfleet]] to stay behind with the aircraft. Moments after stepping away from the clearing into the denser surrounding forest, Grace, Norm and Jake encounter a passing group of non-threatening [[prolemuris]]. Jake immediately draws his weapon, however Grace shoves it back down and expresses how his twitchy and overzealous Marine mentality while carrying a weapon makes her nervous.

Grace leads the team to her abandoned schoolhouse that now only serves the function of being an offsite storage location for scientific research equipment. While inside the school, Grace reminisced over how intelligent the children were and felt sad upon seeing the unused books scattered on the floor, such as The Lorax; placing the fallen books back upon their shelf. Norm asked Grace why the Na'vi don't return and she replied that they learned as much about humanity as they needed to. Jake noticed several bullet holes in a chalkboard and asked about what happened (although the answer was obvious). Grace dodged answering the question, instead redirecting the conversation to pointedly ask Jake one of her own questions about if he were going to help them, as they had a lot of work to do.

After leaving the schoolhouse and walking to a location somewhere else out in the forest, Grace gave Norm hands-on instruction involving root signal transduction and the collection of samples. Jake, being uninterested, slipped away to explore and began to curiously play with helicoradians. This disturbance led to a freak encounter with a herd of nearby [[hammerhead titanothere]]s. The noise alerted Grace, causing both she and Norm to abandon their activity to rush towards Jake and hide behind a nearby tree, attempting to stay out of view from the agitated creature. Jake looked towards Grace, asking about what he's supposed to do. Grace advised Jake to not shoot the animal as its armored hide was too thick, and to hold his ground in response to the titanothere's territorial threat display, which ultimately works.

The scene however is interrupted by the appearance of a deadly prowling [[thanator]], alarming Grace at the incredible peril they were all now in. As the thanator turns its attention toward Jake, Jake again asks Grace what to do. Grace gives a panicked answer of "Run, definitely run!". In the ensuing chaos, the thanator pursues Jake's avatar, separating him from the group, while Grace and Norm run the opposite way and manage to seemingly evade anymore trouble in their return back to the Samson.

By Grace's insistence, the team while aboard Samson 16 remained for as long as possible in the surrounding area performing an aerial search. As sunset approached, Trudy had to make the difficult call to return to Hell's Gate and suspend their search until morning due to Quaritch's order disallowing night-time flight-ops. Grace was convinced that Jake's avatar wouldn't survive the night. When Jake finally exited his link, much to the relief of the avatar team, Grace was astonished when Jake told her that he managed to infiltrate the Omatikaya clan and that Neytiri would be personally mentoring him.

The following morning at breakfast on May 22, Grace is sitting at the scientists' usual table in the commissary lively recounting the tale of their outing, with several staff members around her listening intently. Grace herself was still not able to fathom how the Omatikaya had decided to choose Jake of all people.

### The Three Months

Grace, although apprehensive of Jake being chosen by the Omatikaya clan, assisted him with his training.

After she learned from Max that Jake was colluding with Quaritch and Selfridge (by giving them information about the structure of the Omatikaya Hometree), she relocated the team to [[Site 26]] way up in the [[Hallelujah Mountains]] to intentionally separate them. Grace however continued to be friendly toward Jake. Although Jake remarked that this was only because Grace needed a way back into the Omatikaya clan, she demonstrated genuine care for him, worrying over his eating habits and even lifted him into his bunk on night after he fell asleep in front of his video log camera.

One night, after Jake does a sixteen-hour link, Grace heats up a packaged burrito for him and softly implores him to eat it. She has been taking care of his nutritional needs for his neglected human body. Seeing his continued weight loss, she voices her concern as his boss and as someone who might even consider being a friend someday, giving his head a quick caress. Jake asks Grace what happened at her school, and she finally reveals that there was a massacre where a group of young rebel Na'vi hunters were followed to the school and killed by RDA troopers, detailing how Sylwanin was the first to die quickly followed by the others, having been shot in the doorway right in front of her sister Neytiri. While holding back tears, Grace admits the deep pain it caused her, especially as they called her "mother" in their language. She warned Jake to try not to get too emotionally attached to his life as an avatar.

Due to Jake's progress in learning how to become a member of the clan, he was able to sweettalk Mo'at and Eytukan into allowing Grace to visit the Omatikaya Hometree again, much to the delight of some of her former Na'vi students, including [[Tsu'tey]]. Tsu'tey initially hid from her out of nervousness behind some foliage, calling Atan over to ask him about her presence in the village, before revealing himself to speak to her. Grace was glad to see him, and asked if he remembered his English lessons, which he did, and demonstrated his English to Grace. He also called her sa'nok, meaning "mother", the term of affection that he and the other school students had used for Grace. He expresses his concern over Jake to Grace, and though she empathizes with him, she tells him that Jake may yet surprise them all.

The three months that Quaritch allocated to Jake goes by quickly. During that time, Jake completes each of the Omatikaya's rites of passage for their warriors (to ride, to hunt, and to fly). On August 18, Grace witnesses Jake's acceptance ceremony as a full member of the clan at the Omatikaya Hometree, proudly and seemingly on the verge of crying.

This moment of happiness does not last, as the next day of August 19 is full of turmoil following the RDA's morning bulldozing of the [[Tree of Voices]]. As the clan prepares to gather a war party (ordered by [[Eytukan]]) led by Tsu'tey to make a retaliatory attack against the Sky People's machines, Grace tries to interject saying it will only make things worse, however since Grace doesn't have full clan status unlike Jake, Tsu'tey reminds her that she does not have permission to speak here. After Jake and Neytiri arrive moments later, Tsu'tey shoves Jake to the ground, with which Grace as well as the entire clan then shockingly learn that Jake is now mated with Neytiri. Grace watches the altercation unfold from the sideline, standing next to Mo'at, Neytiri, and Eytukan, as Jake fights off Tsu'tey and stands his ground.

Meanwhile, unbeknownst to her, Quaritch invades Site 26 with a small SecOps squad. Norm protests and is physically shoved out of the way as he informs Quaritch that interrupting a link-in-progress is very dangerous. Quaritch ignores this protocol and slams his hand down on Grace's link unit's emergency shutdown button anyway, before moving on to Jake's link unit where he does the same. At the Omatikaya Hometree, Grace's avatar collapses without warning and is quickly followed by Jake's avatar doing the same due to their links disconnecting. Upon jarringly experiencing an unexpected forced link exit, Grace is confused as she doesn't know what's going on or why.

Grace is angry at Quaritch's interference. She, Jake, and Norm are handcuffed and airlifted via Samson back to Hell's Gate. At the Omatikaya Hometree, both Grace's and Jake's inert avatars are lifted and carried upwards into the structure of Hometree. Neytiri and a male warrior oversee the bodies.

While at Hell's Gate, the trio are taken to the Ops center in which Quaritch plays back the video feed of Jake's avatar beating on the dozer's camera. Grace rubs at her wrists resulting from previously being restrained by flexcuffs. She tries to mediate with Parker, but Quaritch barks an order at her to "shut [her] piehole". Grace snaps back an "or what?" reply at him and then tells Selfridge that he needs to "muzzle [his] dog". Parker steps in directing both of them to "take it down a couple of notches". Jake says to Quaritch that he should listen to Grace if he wants to keep his people alive.

This opens the floor for Grace to then explain to Selfridge the preliminary findings she's observed from her research which shows that each tree of Pandora acts as a neuron, in which the collective of all trees across Pandora behaves like a giant brain that the Na'vi can access to upload and download data (memories) at sacred sites like the one he just destroyed. She tries to instill in him that this is the true value of this world, much to Selfridge's ignorant disbelief as he laughs in her face and jokes that she must have smoked drugs. Quaritch then plays one of Jake's video logs where he admits that the Omatikaya will never leave their Hometree and that trying to convince them has been a waste of time. Grace shakes her head at how Jake's video log just condemned the fate of the Omatikaya, and places her hand on Jake's shoulder as a form of support.

Grace tries to reason with Parker, however Parker has had enough and pulls the metaphorical plug on the entire Avatar Program, shutting it down. He then orders the SecOps troopers in the room to escort the trio to gather their belongings, as everyone involved with the program is to be sent back to Earth on the next shuttle. Grace objects, saying that he can't do that. As she approaches Selfridge who's now standing in front of his office door, troopers (including Wainfleet) block her way. Grace is completely powerless, being left stunned and speechless as she turns to look back at Jake.

### Destruction of the Hometree

Following the Omatikaya's retaliatory nighttime raid destroying the dozers, the next day on August 20, Quaritch convinces Selfridge to "pull the trigger" and attack the Omatikaya Hometree. As Quaritch has pilots mobilize for an airstrike, Trudy rushes to the SciOps module. In the biolab, the entire room is busy with activity as staff move about with files and crates. Grace is sitting at a work station, having just cracked opened a sealed bottle of amber alcohol to drink and downs a partially filled glass. SecOps troopers are all around the room and give out orders for staff to get their things packed. Grace laments to Jake about how Selfridge and Quaritch never wanted the Avatar Program to succeed, having bulldozed a sacred site on purpose to trigger a response, fabricating a war in order to get what they want. Jake frustratingly comments similarly about how if someone is the enemy, then it's considered justifiable to take things from them. Trudy arrives and notifies the trio of Quaritch's imminent gunship attack on the Omatikaya Hometree, which horrifies Grace.

Grace immediately gets up and goes to the Ops center followed by Jake. A trooper persistently tries to stop her from being in the control tower, however she disregards him, twice having ordered him to "backoff" and shoves him away. As she confronts Selfridge, he becomes irate and yells at her that the Omatikaya can simply move into another tree. Grace pleads to Selfridge about how there are families consisting of children and babies living within Hometree. Jake supports her by telling Selfridge that he doesn't want that kind of blood on his hands and asks that Selfridge let him try to talk them out. Following this plea, Selfridge along with several troopers then escort Grace and Jake to the link room, giving them one hour to try to convince the Omatikaya to evacuate.

At the Omatikaya Hometree, Grace and Jake's avatars awaken somewhere upstairs. When they do so, an unnamed warrior runs down the central column to notify Eytukan and Mo'at of this development. He is quickly followed by Neytiri leading Jake and Grace. Jake desperately tries to warn the clan about the impending attack, as Grace stands by him. Jake then revealed his true mission, to which Neytiri feels immense betrayal. Grace speaks up to help defend Jake, but it does nothing. Eytukan then orders for both of them to be bound. Grace tries earnestly to warn them of the impending danger.

After being strung up outside, Jake and Grace yell at the Omatikaya to flee, however all of them decide instead to stand their ground (ignorant to the RDA's firepower capabilities). When the RDA arrive, Quaritch sees both of the avatars tied up which signifies to him that diplomatic negotiations have failed. Quaritch starts the assault with deploying gas canisters into the base of Hometree. While the smoke does cause the Omatikaya inside Hometree to exit, when the warriors in response shoot arrows at the gunship, Quaritch escalates by launching incendiaries into Hometree to burn it up and further scatter the people.

At witnessing the carnage the RDA wrought on the Omatikaya Hometree, Mo'at desperately pleads with Jake to help the people before setting both he and Grace free of their bindings. Jake then leads Grace and Mo'at away. Moments later, Quaritch orders the pilots to launch high explosive rockets at the base of Hometree's west support columns. The initial blast knocks the trio off their feet. Jake then both shoves Grace and pulls Mo'at over a downed log to take cover from the blasts' shockwaves and flying debris. When the explosions subside, Hometree begins to fall.

The trio run away to gain distance, with Grace glancing up at Hometree several times to keep track of its fall. Right as Hometree's crown is about the hit the ground, the trio change direction, with Jake grabbing Grace to pull her back a few feet. As the trunk hits, the ground beneath them rumbles and shakes, knocking them off balance multiple times; Jake continues to aid Grace to safety, by helping to pick her up to get her back on her feet, and guide her away. As the felled Hometree settles, the trio observe the tragic scene with severe anguish at the magnitude of devastation and resulting loss of life.

After the Omatikaya Hometree's destruction, Selfridge orders the troopers to pull both drivers out of their links. Conflict erupts in the room as Norm tries to protect Grace by blocking her link unit controls, shoving the troopers away and punching one of them. Norm however is quickly overpowered and arrested, being flexcuffed to a nearby rail. Jake and Grace's [[link unit]]s are deactivated by emergency stop causing their avatars to collapse lifelessly to the ground. In the link room, Grace is forcefully being held back and restrained by two troopers as she yells at Selfridge, labeling him a murderer. Back at the felled Hometree, her avatar is brought along with the Omatikaya to the Tree of Souls (a decision enforced by Mo'at's order), pulled along on a makeshift sledge. Conversely, Jake's avatar is left in the ashes of the burning Hometree.

### Escape from Hell's Gate

After being incarcerated by the RDA, sometime during the night [[Trudy Chacón]] and [[Max Patel]] free Norm, Jake, and Grace from their holding cell. All five of them hustle through the ground floor corridors towards an exit leading out to Trudy's Samson 16, with Norm and Trudy running ahead of the other three. As Grace, Jake, and Max reach the external airlock, Grace immediately goes to the airlock's stored [[exopacks]] while Jake tells Max to stay behind to be an inside man.

As Norm removes the protective covers and Trudy begins to spool up the aircraft, they are ambushed by a guard threatening them to turn off the engines and exit. Jake and Grace then arrive with Jake pointing his pistol at the guard, telling him to get down and put his hands over his head. At the guard failing to comply, Grace approaches the trooper and orders him to do as Jake says. Following this, the guard lays down on the tarmac with his weapon.

In the Ops center control tower, an operator notices this situation on a security camera feed at her station. She alerts Quaritch, and as he comes over to her station, the operator enlarges the feed. They watch the trooper run away and the group focus back on the Samson. At the Samson, Norm and Grace help lift Jake into the aircraft. Enraged by the break-out, Quaritch snatches an assault rifle from a trooper, and without grabbing an exopack, he storms outside of the Ops center onto an exterior catwalk overseeing the airfield. He fires the weapon at the Samson as Grace loads Jake's wheelchair and then climbs up and into the Samson while Trudy takes off. When the magazine runs out, Quaritch switches to his Wasp sidearm. As the team celebrate successfully managing to escape Hell's Gate, Grace clutches at her side; her bloody hand and clothing revealing at some point during the barrage of gunfire that she suffered a bullet wound to her upper right torso either from a direct hit (likely as she stepped up on the Samson's skid to climb in) or by ricochet.

They fly to Site 26 and load Grace and several supplies from the residential cabin into the link shack. Trudy (with Norm in his avatar acting as a spotter) airlifts the link shack, heading toward the Tree of Souls. Inside the link shack, an injured Grace is lying down on the bed of her link unit. Jake tends to her, giving her a shot of morphine and inspects her bloody bandages. She's severely pale and the amount of soaked-up blood is alarming. Jake tries to comfort and reassure her by telling her that the clan can help her. Grace weakly rebuffs his claim by reminding him that she's a scientist and doesn't believe in fairytales. She also questions why the clan would help them, to which Jake doesn't have an answer.

As dawn breaks on August 21, they arrive at the Tree of Souls and land in the forest somewhere nearby. Jake links up with his avatar, awakening at the Omatikaya's destroyed Hometree. He mounts his banshee and at some point during the day, locates a toruk and becomes the sixth [[Toruk Makto]]. That evening, Jake arrives on the toruk at the Tree of Souls to seek [[Eywa]]'s help, informing the tsahìk that his friend Grace was dying. Mo'at agrees, telling Jake to bring her.

### Grace's Death

It is nighttime when everything is organized and ready for the clan to perform a special ceremony at the Tree of Souls. In preparation, both of Grace's bodies had been completely stripped of all clothing, with Grace's human body only wearing her necklace along with some vines wrapped around her for modesty. As the clan await with their queues attached to the roots next to them, Norm carries Grace's inert avatar body while Jake's carries Grace's failing human body.

Jake speaks to Grace to get her attention. When she wakes, Grace is bewildered by the Tree of Souls, wishing she was in a better condition to still collect samples. After both bodies are carefully laid upon the tree's hearth, in a trance-like state, Mo'at leads the clan through a chant-like prayer in the hope that Eywa would permanently transfer Grace's consciousness into her avatar body. During the process, a glowing mysterious tendril-like queue formed and connected to the back of Grace's neck at the base of her skull. Unfortunately, Grace succumbs to her fatal wounds before the process is complete.

Moments before she passes away, Grace told Jake that she was with Eywa, whom she now knew firsthand to be real. After her death, Neytiri removed Grace's exopack mask and gently cupped the back of her teacher's head with her hand. While Grace's consciousness did not successfully transfer to her avatar, the neural link created when the tendrils of the Tree of Souls interfaced with her human body allowed her full memories to be uploaded into the 'organic computer' of Pandora's ecosystem: the Pandoran Neural Network.

The pain of Grace's death emboldens Jake to take up the mantle of the sixth Toruk Makto. Impassioned by Grace's death as well as by the deaths of other clan/family members and the loss of their Hometree, the Omatikaya clan join Jake in rallying other clans to fight back against the RDA.

### Post-Death

The next night on August 22, Jake begs Eywa for help in the upcoming fight against the RDA by asking Eywa that if Grace was with her, to access Grace's memories, as they would reveal how Earth's ecosystem had been catastrophically decimated by humans (having killed their "mother"); a terrible danger that Pandora now faced.

The following morning, after Quaritch launches his assault, Eywa answers Jake's plea and sends Pandora's wildlife to help the Na'vi in the Battle of Ayram Alusìng; successfully ousting the RDA from the exomoon. This alliance between the Na'vi and the other wildlife against humanity and their destructive machines is the creation of Pandora's protective "immune response"; where if humans linger for longer than ten minutes in any given area (especially in the Hallelujah Mountains), Eywa's forces will attack them.

The SciOps staff return Grace's avatar (now permanently in a vegetative state due to Grace's death) back to being in-vitro in an amnio tank, in which it will forever remain as such for as long as it continues to live. Not long after, they learn that the avatar is mysteriously pregnant (the father, if any, remains unknown).

One year after the battle, in 2155, Grace's dormant avatar gives birth to a healthy baby girl named [[Kiri]]. Jake and Neytiri decide to adopt Grace's newborn hybrid Na'vi/avatar daughter and raise her as one of their own alongside their three biological hybrid children: [[Neteyam]], [[Lo'ak]], and [[Tuktirey]]. This news about Augustine having a kid postmortem eventually reaches the [[Western Frontier]]; having been a topic of conversation during the year 2169 between two Resistance members stationed at the Resistance HQ located within the [[Kinglor Forest]].

Since the age of being a child, Kiri is seen to always wear Grace's necklace as a way to remain close to her mother.

As Kiri grows up and becomes older, she begins to visit the amnio tank storage area (containing dormant in-vitro avatars) located within the biolab at Hell's Gate. When possible, she would leave her family to go there to watch old video logs (made by Grace, as well as by Jake)  and would softly talk to Grace's dormant avatar floating behind the glass. She feels a connection to Grace even though they have never met, and is inspired to be somewhat of a botanist herself because of Grace; always learning about plants and adds what she discovers to her clothing, so that she may describe them to others who become curious.

When the RDA returns to Pandora in late 2168, the less-than-half of the staff at Hell's Gate who refuse to surrender decide to evacuate alongside the Omatikaya clan; fleeing to [[High Camp]] up in the [[Hallelujah Mountains]] as a last defensive stronghold. The avatar staff who relocate to High Camp bring along with them Grace's avatar.

A year later in late 2169, Kiri visits Grace's avatar in the High Camp Biolab and watches an old video log of Grace from her time at Site 26 that was made only days before her death. [[Miles Socorro]] and [[Lo'ak]] speculate who Kiri's father is and joke that it could be Norm due to Norm's frequent presence in the lab with Grace, as well as both he and Grace having a lot of eye contact in the video footage; an idea Kiri is disgusted by.

Within the following months after the Sully family flees High Camp and seeks [[uturu]] with the [[Metkayina clan]], Kiri connects to the Spirit Tree in the Cove of the Ancestors, entering the [[Spirit World]]. In Kiri's vision, she is in a lab and sees the spirit of her biological mother Grace in her human form sitting in a rolling desk chair looking through a microscope at a sample. Grace senses that she isn't alone and pivots to turn around. Grace recognizes Kiri as her beautiful daughter and stands up. She's happily surprised to see her, however notes that Kiri seems to be emotionally troubled about something and reaches out towards her. Kiri without hesitation rushes forward to hug Grace, and Grace soothes her by stroking Kiri's back while telling her that "It'll be okay".

Halfway through the embrace the scene shifts, and Grace has now somehow fluidly become her avatar form, along with both mother and daughter now standing within the commons of the Omatikaya Hometree. After the hug concludes, they separate slightly but still remain in physical contact by holding onto each other's forearms. Grace inquires about what's bothering Kiri. Kiri then asks Grace about why she's different from everyone else, about what the Great Mother wants from her, and lastly about her father's identity. Grace tries to answer but struggles to get any words out besides "Oh, my darling" while shifting her grip to hold Kiri's hands within her own. The vision then distorts and Grace lets out a yell, with Kiri screaming after her, as she's suddenly yanked backwards away from Kiri by an unknown force, separating the pair from each other as both of them are engulfed in a blinding white light.

The connection inexplicably causes Kiri to suffer from a major seizure. After Kiri finally awakens sometime later that day in the evening with the help of [[Ronal]], she begins to sob as she remembers what happened and the feelings it evoked, including the profound sense of loss resulting from Grace seemingly being taken away from her.

After Kiri had another seizure while trying to connect to the [[Tree of Souls]], her parents, Norm and [[Mo'at]] finally told her truth: tests done on Grace's pregnant avatar and Kiri had revealed that they had the same genetic code. Kiri was a parthenogenic birth, she had no father, and was in essence a clone of Grace's avatar. When Grace was connected to the Tree of Souls for the consciousness transfer, a "seed" was planted in her avatar by Eywa, resulting in Kiri.

When Kiri connected to the Spirit Tree again with Spider, they enter a vision of the [[Omatikaya Hometree]] within the Spirit World where many of those who have died greet them, including [[Eytukan]], [[Tsu'tey]] and Grace. Grace has fun teasing Spider before he is welcomed into the People.

## Personality and Traits

Grace was an intelligent, bold, outspoken, and hard-working scientist with a fascination for Pandora's flora and fauna. Her favorite Pandoran animal was the [[fan lizard]]. Grace can be viewed as being a "glass half empty" type of woman; Selfridge having commented on her cynical and ungrateful outlook at having received a former Marine instead of a researcher for an avatar driver, saying she should consider herself lucky that Jake wasn't "some oral hygienist or something." However, when in her avatar form, Grace seemed more enthusiastic about her work and more cheerful and kind instead of being irritable. Her human irritability seems highly likely to stem from nicotine withdrawal symptoms after spending long amounts of time in a link unit, hence her immediate crankiness upon waking and demanding for her cigarette. She's seen to be pleasant otherwise with employees who work directly alongside her in her science department.

Grace was quite intelligent, and was able to correctly deduce the truth about the Pandoran neural network using her own science, though for better or for worse, she seemed to keep her theories to herself, concerned the RDA would metaphorically "crucify" her and think she's crazy. As a scientist, Grace had a skeptical nature and was possibly an atheist, claiming she was not one to believe in fairy tales. Her primary concern was with her work. She demonstrated her dedication to the study of Pandora and the Na'vi early and often; this dedication often manifested itself as hostility towards Colonel Quaritch and Parker Selfridge, who did not share her enthusiasm. As a result of this hostility, it was considered by many outside the Avatar Program that Grace was little more than an introverted and lonely scientist who loved plants more than people.

When first introduced, Grace can be interpreted as having blunt, rude, and standoffish behavior. She had a noticeable negative bias towards military members due to the RDA's actions. While Grace has a backbone, she also made condescending remarks about Jake's intelligence, belittling the paraplegic young man, as she assumed him to be another useless “trigger-happy moron” that would further interfere with her work and damage relations with the Na'vi. Although he traveled a vast distance from Earth to assist her team, she refused to reciprocate his handshake at first meeting. Although she lacked the information that Tom had died, when Jake told her, she immediately changed the topic to Jake's work experiences, instead of expressing her condolences. Grace was not entirely callous towards him though, as she attempts to help lift him into the link unit his first time, but is refused by him. She also tries to understand his mindset at coming to Pandora (an incredibly hostile environment) without any training whatsoever, and is taken aback at his resilient response of "Maybe I was sick of doctors telling me what I couldn't do", as the term 'doctors' included scholars like her too, not just medical professionals.

Grace's attitude towards Jake greatly changes after he nearly dies in the forest, and she seems to feel some guilt and responsibility over this. She had previously told Jake earlier that he should relax, and for unclear reasons, Jake did not know how to handle a thanator and a titanothere, apparently uneducated about Pandora's fauna - which may partially be Grace's fault at failing to fully prepare him for their outing; having possibly not briefed him prior to leaving Hell's Gate about all of the dangers that they could potentially expect to encounter while out in the forest. This lack of shared insight may have been due to Grace theoretically having never encountered either species in that particular area of the forest surrounding the schoolhouse during the past twelve years that she's been visiting there, and thus assumedly didn't believe that there would have been any major threats to warn against during the current expedition. After Jake's avatar is separated from the group during his first expedition, Grace doesn't give up on him and has Trudy fly in a search pattern overhead which lasts until sunset (flight-ops curfew), regretful at the prospect of his avatar being dead by morning. When Jake finally awakens in his human body after a potentially traumatic night surviving in the forest, Grace leads his recovery. She checks his pupillary response and pats his face, keeping a hand on him at all times while telling him reassuringly "there you go" and "you're okay" before sitting him up and asking Jake if his avatar body was safe; receiving a smiling chuckling laugh from him in response.

Despite her somewhat aloof nature, Grace's compassionate side can also be seen in other ways. She appeared to be very fond of and close to her Na'vi students, who seemed to show the same feelings toward her; this was demonstrated when they dragged her unconscious avatar body to the Tree of Souls with them after the destruction of the Omatikaya Hometree. Grace harbored great guilt for the school shooting deaths, commenting, "That kind of pain reaches back through the link." Ever since then, she became more emotionally distanced during her work on Pandora.

Grace can be interpreted as a bit naïve and illusioned about corporations such as the RDA, at times not being able to see the bigger picture. When Mo'at pointed out humanity could have poisoned the Na'vi, Grace was immediately dismissive to the idea despite that this was later discovered to be the truth. However, Grace was unaware of the illegal dumping of the black sludge; she was correct that the illness wasn't intentional harm by the RDA or a biochemical weapon created against the Na'vi. Instead, the dumpings were done by a pair of RDA employees out of sheer ignorant disregard for proper disposal methods; Selfridge was also unaware of these dumpings, believing the sludge was being collected and contained, thus not the cause of the illness - influencing Grace's investigation, forcing her to look for a different source.

Grace's character's growth and arc revolves around her being able to tap into her seemingly repressed compassionate side that has been hardened due to the RDA's actions, and realize that she can not judge the hearts of all military men; a major theme of the Avatar franchise is that generalizing entire groups of people can be wrong. She had two major conflicts. One of them is her not being hypocritical and admitting she can be wrong, and living in accordance and harmony with the values of her ideals. Grace wants other people to understand and empathize with the Na'vi, an example of her hypocrisy when it comes to her treatment of Jake and SecOps, and she learns how to meet people where they are better. Jake also points out her hypocritical ways; Grace was a smoker and she told Jake he needed to look after himself, causing him to take a cigarette from her mouth and say she can lecture him when she looks after her own body first.

The other conflict is her inability to heal from her traumatic experiences and guilt as to what happened with Sylwanin, still feeling the pain of the incident two years later after being being ostracized from the clan. She views Jake as a second chance at redemption, and while Jake suspects she is only being nicer to him in order to try to find a way back into the clan, it becomes evident that Grace begins to view Jake less like a tool and more of a human being who deserves respect. Grace is able to grow a fondness for Jake and looked after his welfare, ensuring that his human body kept eating. Jake's accomplishments are able to give Grace a more optimistic view of human nature before her death.

Besides intelligence and compassion, another defining character trait Grace is seen to exhibit is her proclivity to be punctual. This can be seen across several scenes, including in deleted scenes. Grace is seen to run the start of operations involving Norm and Jake at the top of the hour, and impresses upon them the importance of being on-time. After first meeting, Max instructs Jake to return the next morning. That morning, as both men watch their freshly decanted avatars through a window, Grace tells them "let's go guys, we're burning daylight", as the drivers were scheduled to link in the next two minutes. The next day after breakfast, their first sortie is scheduled for 09:00 LST. As they pack their gear, Grace tells them "guys, we're on the flightline in ten minutes". The next morning following after breakfast, for Jake's third link, both he and Norm create a small delay by arguing. Grace steps in to get Jake to hustle into his link by telling him "let's go, village life starts early". Grace is mindful about time, staying on schedule, as well as keeps track of how long a driver's link lasts: she is seen to quickly usher the lingering med techs out of the longhouse in order to have the drivers delink for dinner time, and made a verbal note to Jake one night while at Site 26 about having just undergone a 16-hour link that day; being critical of Jake pushing himself too hard and advising him take some down time to focus on his neglected human body.