**Jacob "Jake" Sully** (Na'vi name: **Tsyeyk Suli** (/tsjɛjk suli/)) is the main protagonist of the first _[[Avatar]]_ film, and a main character in _[[Avatar: The Way of Water]]_ and _[[Avatar: Fire and Ash]]_. He is also a major character in the comics.

As a Marine, Jake was deployed to Venezuela to extract resources during the Resource Wars where he was paralyzed. At the age of 22, Jake left [[Earth]] to take over his murdered twin brother's RDA contract to be an avatar driver on the exomoon [[Pandora]]. He was assigned by [[RDA]] leaders [[Miles Quaritch]] and [[Parker Selfridge]] to infiltrate the [[Omatikaya clan]] of the [[Na'vi]] and, over the course of three months, convince them to leave their home. Instead, Jake mated with [[Neytiri]] and defected from the RDA after they toppled the clan's home and killed Na'vi in the process. Jake refused to accept the RDA's plans for Pandora, and he led a revolt against the RDA to protect the Na'vi from subjugation, expelling the company from the exomoon. Jake was given the leadership role from the current dying clan leader. Using the [[Tree of Souls]], Jake's consciousness was permanently transferred into his avatar.

Years later, Jake and Neytiri are parents to three biological children ([[Neteyam]], [[Lo'ak]], and [[Tuktirey]]) and their adopted daughter [[Kiri]]. Upon the RDA's return and the onset of the Second Pandoran War, Jake became a major war leader of [[The Resistance]]. With the appearance of Recombinant soldiers, Jake renounces his leadership, leaving operations to [[Alma Cortez]]. Jake and his family fled from their hidden home to take safe refuge with a reef clan, learning their ways. After several months, the Recombinants and Quaritch's clone found Jake's family, and a skirmish killed Jake's eldest son Neteyam.

Later on, Jake encounters two new Na'vi clans and becomes involved in a conflict with [[Varang]], the leader of the [[Mangkwan clan]].

For a full breakdown of Jake's age across different periods and bodies, see the [list of ages](#age).

## Biography

#### On Earth

Jake was born on August 24, 2126 and raised on Earth. He grew up hearing about Pandora, a small moon orbiting the gas giant [[Polyphemus]] in the Alpha Centauri System and lived his childhood with his twin brother, Tommy. While Tommy was into studying, Jake was the more outgoing sibling. The brothers both enjoyed learning about myths and legends about heroes, with Jake being interested in Alexander the Great.

He joined the United States Marines Corps as a young adult for the hardship involved and a cause to fight for. He was promoted to the rank of Corporal and became a Recon Marine assigned to the Marine Corps First Reconnaissance Battalion. During a deployment, he suffered a spinal injury in an unnamed "mean bush" war in Venezuela, leaving him paralyzed from the waist down. While recovering in the VA hospital, he would often have strange recurring dreams of flying over a jungle, feeling free.

In the year 2148, Jake lived in a dilapidated cell-like single room apartment located in a polluted overpopulated city; remarking that simply buying a basic cup of coffee has become ridiculously expensive. Though corrective spinal technology existed to repair Jake's back injury, his VA benefits were not enough to pay for the surgery, resulting in him being relegated to using a wheelchair.

After a night of drinking, Jake started a bar fight with a man who struck a woman. The bouncers throw him out into their rainy alleyway and chuck his wheelchair at him. In response, Jake called them candy-ass bitches. While staring up at the sky filled with the holograms and watching an elevated mag-lev train pass by, he is approached by two RDA agents who confirm his identity. Although he told them to go away, they informed him that his identical twin brother, Tom, had been killed in a mugging, garnering Jake's interest.

At the municipal crematorium, Jake identifies his brother's body and laments how his brother died due to someone wanting paper in his wallet. The agents explain that Tom represented a sizable investment for their company, and with Jake's genome being identical to his, they offered Jake the opportunity to take over Tom's contract with a fresh start in a new world. With nothing left to lose, and not much else to live on Earth for, Jake agrees to take over his brother's contract.

#### Arrival on Pandora

In 2154, after five years, nine months, and twenty-two days of travel, Jake awakens from cryosleep aboard the ISV Venture Star as it orbited above Pandora. Along with the other new arrivals, Jake disembarked from a [[Valkyrie]] shuttle at [[Hell's Gate]], where he had his first contact with Pandora's hostile climate. Upon landing, Jake and the other passengers are ordered to don their exopack masks, alerting them of Pandora's toxic and deadly atmosphere.

Being the last to enter the RDA facility, Jake listens to Colonel Miles Quaritch (the Chief of Security Operations) give all new arrivals a security briefing explaining the dangers of Pandora; stressing the biggest threat to their survival is every living creature outside of the perimeter fence, focusing on the indigenous population of humanoids called the Na'vi.

#### Avatar Program

Jake met Norm Spellman, a xenoanthropologist (that arrived on the same rotation as Jake) who had trained alongside his brother for three years. Jake was later introduced by Dr. [[Max Patel]] to Dr. [[Grace Augustine]], a legendary pioneering xenobotanist as well as the head of the [[Avatar Program]]. However, Grace was displeased with RDA administrator Parker Selfridge's decision to use Jake to replace his brother's avatar driver position, as not only was Jake not an able researcher that Grace needed, but she believed that Jake being a former Marine would be a "trigger-happy moron" who would compromise the cultural ambassador efforts of the Avatar Program to reconnect with the Na'vi. Quaritch, however, saw this as a valuable opportunity and decided to take advantage of Jake's military training, giving him the task of finding out all he can about the Na'vi, pretending to be in league with the avatar team, and reporting his findings to the RDA. In return, Quaritch told Jake that if he succeeds, he will see to it that Jake gets the surgery needed to regain the use of his legs.

Returning to the link room with Norm, Jake was prepped by Grace and Max to link with his avatar for the first time. When Jake first entered his avatar, he began to move about, trying to get a feel for his avatar. Realizing that he finally had the use of his legs for the first time in years, he immediately got up and starts trying to walk, much to the dismay and annoyance of the lab team. He was told to sit back down, or he would be sedated, but he refused and headed for the exit. After escaping the ambient room, he ran through the [[Avatar Compound]] across the basketball court, past the obstacle course, and through the garden. He finally stopped in the garden near the longhouse, digging his toes into the soil and breathing in fresh air, enjoying the feeling of his legs and feet along with the freedom of not being paralyzed. Mere seconds later, he met Grace in her avatar form, impressed at the athletic figure of her younger avatar body. Grace tested his ability to catch, throwing him a Spartan fruit, appraising his motor reflexes as "looking good".

#### First Contact with Pandora

Grace took Norm and Jake (as security escort) on an expedition to retrieve samples of Pandoran flora. Trudy Chacón is their assigned Samson pilot for the expedition along with [[Lyle Wainfleet]] serving as additional non-avatar security (Jake and Lyle being door gunners during the flight). Jake, Grace, and Norm visited Grace's closed school. Upon seeing bullet holes in a wall, Jake asked Grace what happened, but she changed the subject and the three continued on with the expedition. While Grace and Norm study the signal transduction of tree roots, Jake wanders away, and while playing around with some nearby helicoradians, stumbles across a group of hammerhead titanotheres. One of the [[hammerhead titanothere]]s threatens to charge at Jake, but is repelled by an approaching [[thanator]], the apex terrestrial predator of the region. The creature starts chasing Jake who runs for his life, having his backpack snatched from his back and losing his weapon in the process. He narrowly escapes death from the thanator by leaping from the top of a cliff into a river below. After failing to locate Jake, the avatar team is forced to abandon the search for him as night operations were deemed too dangerous by Quaritch.

As Jake travels through the forest of Pandora alone, a Na'vi named Neytiri discovers his presence and prepares to kill him with her bow. However, a [[woodsprite]], a pure spirit from the [[Tree of Souls]], lands on the tip of her arrow. Taking this as a sign from Eywa, the godlike spirit of the forest and deity of the Na'vi, she lets Jake live and continues to follow him until darkness falls. Jake creates a torch using a makeshift spear, his coat, and sap from the trees. When he lights his torch, he discovers he is surrounded by a pack of viperwolves. Jake fights until he is pinned, at which point Neytiri saves him, having to kill several viperwolves in Jake's defense. Jake tries to communicate with Neytiri as she speaks over the dead viperwolf, but she seems to ignore him and walks away.

Jake pursues Neytiri and tries to thank her for killing the viperwolves, which angers Neytiri. She tells him that the unnecessary killing of the creatures is not something to be grateful for. Jake asks Neytiri why she saved him. She replies that Jake has a strong heart and no fear. Jake follows her but she rejects him and was told to go back since he shouldn't be here at first, as he is one of the Sky People (the Na'vi term for humans) and cannot go with her. Suddenly, dozens of woodsprites appear and land on Jake's body. Neytiri, amazed, recognizes the woodsprites' actions as a sign and decides to take Jake to her village to allow [[Mo'at]], the Omatikaya clan's Tsahìk (spiritual leader), to interpret the will of Eywa and decide what should be done with Jake.

#### Becoming One of "The People"

When Jake and Neytiri arrive at Hometree, the massive tree that the Omatikaya clan lives in, Jake meets with [[Eytukan]] and Mo'at, the leaders of the clan and parents of Neytiri. Jake also meets with the finest warrior and leader of the Omatikaya clan's hunters, [[Tsu'tey]], who is betrothed to Neytiri and chosen to one day become the future clan leader. Jake presents himself as a warrior with the intention to learn from them. Tsu'tey insists on killing Jake, but Eytukan wishes to find out more about the warriors of the Sky People. Mo'at, as the spiritual leader, orders Neytiri to teach Jake how to be one of The People. Reluctantly, Neytiri submits to her mother's command and teaches Jake about the Na'vi culture and language.

Back at Hell's Gate, Jake reports to Selfridge and Quaritch on information about the natives. Impressed, Quaritch claims that he wished that he "had ten more like you (Jake)". Grace becomes aware of their interest in Jake's information and arranges for the avatar team to be transferred to a remote camp in the floating [[Hallelujah Mountains]] in order to continue their program without military involvement. Jake knows that Grace disapproves of Quaritch and Selfridge's interference and that is why she moved the team. Jake continues to check in remotely with Quaritch over the next three months, though check ins become less and less frequent.

It is during this time that Jake receives instruction. He is taught the Na'vi language by Norm and Neytiri. While learning how to ride Pale, a [[direhorse]], he fails with Tsu'tey and another hunter watching. He is taught how to walk and hunt silently. Jake's relationship with Grace also improves and the two become friends, and Grace comes to the point of even putting Jake into his bunk after a late-night video-log contribution and forces Jake to eat, even if he does not want to. Grace tells Jake about the slaughter at her school where many young Na'vi were killed by RDA soldiers, including Neytiri's sister, Sylwanin, and the pain that it brought her. Jake and Neytiri's relationship grow and an attraction develops. Following a successful hunt in which Jake makes his first clean kill after stalking a hexapede and performing a ritual, Neytiri, greatly impressed, tells Jake that he is ready to choose his own banshee (ikran).

Led by Tsu'tey, he and two other Na'vi hunters undertake the ritual of [[Iknimaya]] and climb the path to the banshee's nest. There, Jake learns how to bond with (tsaheylu) and control his banshee, Bob. Once Jake masters his banshee, he joins Tsu'tey and the other young hunters, along with Neytiri, on several flights. He participates in a hunt for [[sturmbeest]] and elegantly kills one of them with his bow, proving himself as a "stone cold aerial hunter". Later, he and Neytiri fly together and, on a hunt, are attacked by a [[great leonopteryx]], known to the Na'vi as toruk ("last shadow"), and narrowly escape. That evening, Neytiri explains the significance of the toruk and tells him of her great-great-grandfather, the mighty Toruk Makto (Rider of Last Shadow). She talks about how he was the last of only five Toruk Makto in the history of their clan, how he delivered The People from the time of Great Sorrow, and how much she admired him.

At the end of the three months, Jake reports back to Quaritch as ordered. The Colonel informs Jake that his assignment is over and he is to be transferred immediately back to Earth to receive his promised surgery to restore the use of his legs. However, Jake is now more concerned with the welfare of the Omatikaya and especially the welfare of Neytiri, whom he has fallen in love with, than his desire to walk again. He is now reluctant and wary of his fellow humans trying to exploit the moon's resources. He convinces Quaritch to give him more time in order to convince the clan to relocate peacefully. He tells the Colonel that once he completes that night's ceremony, he will be made part of The People (an honor never granted to an avatar before) and that they will trust him. That night, Jake undergoes the ceremony where Eytukan makes him one of their own and forever a part of The People, with Grace and Neytiri proudly looking on.

Neytiri takes Jake to one of the clan's most sacred places, the [[Tree of Voices]], a holy place where he can connect to the trees and hear the voices of all the spirits of deceased Na'vi. Neytiri tells Jake that now that he is one of the Omatikaya people, he can carve his bow from the wood of Hometree and he can choose a mate, and suggests a few different Na'vi women. Jake tells her that he has chosen her but Neytiri must also choose him. She informs him that she already has and becomes his mate. Once they are mated to each other, they are mated for life. After Jake returns to his human body, he realizes the predicament he put himself in.

#### Destruction of the Hometree

After spending the night with Jake, Neytiri is awakened by a huge bulldozer. She watches it destroy the Trees of Voices. Neytiri tries to wake Jake, but he is in his human body preparing to enter his avatar. Neytiri drags his avatar body while pleading with him to wake up. When Jake finally awakens, he tries to stop the bulldozer by standing in front of it. It stops momentarily but starts up again when Parker orders the driver to keep going. When it starts again, Jake grabs a rock, climbs to the top of the bulldozer and smashes the array of cameras, disabling the vehicle and narrowly avoiding the gunfire from the patrols. When the Tree of Voices was completely destroyed by the RDA, Jake lead her to safety as she was sobbing openly for the destruction that the RDA had caused, he eventually punched a tree in return.

Jake and Neytiri return to Hometree, where Eytukan and Tsu'tey are preparing a war party to avenge the loss of the sacred trees. Jake is confronted by Tsu'tey when he realizes that Jake and Neytiri have mated. Tsu'tey attacks Jake in a fit of rage, attempting to kill him. Jake is able to subdue him and is about to explain his original mission to the Omatikaya, but before he can, Jake and Grace's avatars collapse when they are suddenly sent back to their human bodies by Quaritch, who learned from the Hell Truck's video log that it was Jake who destroyed the cameras. Tsu'tey angrily reminds the clan that Jake is one of the Sky People, but Neytiri stops him from killing Jake's avatar.

When they are brought back to Hell's Gate, Grace tells an unbelieving Parker that the trees and plant life make up a huge network like the synapses of a human brain, and that the Na'vi can access all the information within this network, and so the trees must not be destroyed. After some extensive persuasion, Jake and Grace are allowed by Parker to return to their avatars for one hour to try and get the Na'vi to evacuate. Jake and Grace beg the clan to leave because the Sky People was coming to destroy Hometree, but when Jake reveals his mission which he was sent by the RDA to learning the ways of the Na'vi, and that he knew that the RDA would attack if they don't leave their home, the clan became outraged by this. Neytiri, heartbroken at Jake's revelation, loses faith in Jake, denounced his betrayal and furiously rejects him by saying that he will never be part of the people both in the Na'vi language and in English. Eytukan orders them to be bound and prepares the Omatikaya warriors for the defense of the Hometree.

A large strike force led by Quaritch drives the Na'vi from their home with gas and incendiary rounds, consuming Hometree in flames. A desperate Mo'at releases Jake and Grace from their bindings and pleads with them to save her clan. As the Na'vi begin to flee, Quaritch orders his strike team to switch to high-explosive missiles and to open fire on the roots of Hometree, causing it to collapse onto many of the fleeing Na'vi. Eytukan, who was evacuating the Na'vi that were still inside the burning Hometree, is impaled by a piece of wood sent flying by the rocket explosions. Neytiri finds him, and Eytukan gives her his bow, telling her to defend the clan before succumbing to his wound. Jake finds them and tried to comfort a devastated Neytiri, but she angrily rejects him again by demanding him to go away. She pushed him back, yelled at him to never return before continued weeping and she leaves with the surviving Omatikaya.

While leaving the ruins of Hometree, Jake and Grace are forcefully returned to their real bodies and placed under arrest for treason along with Norm, who assaulted one of the marines who was trying to disable the Link Units. Trudy and Dr. Max Patel rescue the avatar team from prison. Before they get outside, Jake asks Dr. Patel to stay behind and be his man on the inside. Trudy hijacks her Samson and flies them to safety, but not before being fired upon by Quaritch. He fails in stopping the avatar team from escaping, but shoots Grace in the stomach. The team flies the camp container holding the avatar link units from [[Site 26]] into hiding near the Tree of Souls, where the remaining Omatikaya have fled to safety.

Jake returns to his avatar form at the ruins of Hometree. His banshee finds him amidst the ashes and Jake decides that the only way to regain the trust of the Na'vi and save Grace is to "take it to a whole new level". They fly at high altitude until they find the great leonopteryx, at which point Jake leaps from his ikran onto the back of the leonopteryx and bonds with it, becoming the sixth Toruk Makto. After bonding with the creature, he persuades it to form a temporary partnership with him to save Pandora. They confront an RDA soldier in a Scorpion Gunship before heading out to find the Omatikaya clan.[7] To the initial panic and astonishment of the Na'vi, he lands at the Tree of Souls, where the amazed Omatikaya people, including Tsu'tey, recognize him as Toruk Makto. When Neytiri sees him, she knows who Jake has sided with, and is grateful to see him return. Jake reaffirms his love for her and says, "I see you", a Na'vi greeting.

After earning the respect of Tsu'tey, now the clan leader, who agrees to help him stop the Sky People, Jake then makes a plea to Mo’at to save Grace from dying. The Na'vi attempt to place Grace's spirit within her avatar body permanently, but her wounds are too great and she passes on. Before she passes, she tells Jake that she can see Eywa and that she is with her now. Having earned back the clan's trust, Jake asks for Tsu'tey's permission to speak and that it would honor him if he could translate his words into Na'vi. Jake encourages them to fight back against the Sky People.

#### Battle of Ayram Alusing

Jake rallies the Omatikaya clan, and they ride with him as he flies out to gather all the clans for a final attack, just as the previous Toruk Makto did. Jake later makes tsaheylu with the Tree of Souls and asks Eywa to look into Grace's memories and see how humans destroyed Earth, and to intervene to keep them from destroying Pandora as well. Neytiri overhears him and tells him that Eywa does not take sides, she only maintains the balance of life on Pandora.

Surveying the Na'vi with satellites, Quaritch learns that other clans have converged with the Omatikaya at the Tree of Souls and decides to destroy them and their holy ground to put an end to their defiance once and for all. A huge military fleet commandeered by Quaritch approaches the Tree of Souls, using the Valkyrie shuttle as a makeshift bomber and mining explosives as "daisy cutter" munitions to destroy the tree. Thousands of Na'vi warriors led by Jake and Tsu'tey take to the skies and attack the fleet, while Norm rides with the cavalry on the ground. The Na'vi forces on the ground are easily defeated by human infantry and their powerful AMP suits and suffer heavy losses. In the skies, a massive air battle ensues between the human air fleet and Na'vi hunters riding banshees. The Na'vi inflict some casualties on the humans with their initial strike, managing to take down several human gunships. However, the humans' superior firepower sees them inflict heavier casualties on the Na'vi, and they look to resume their bombing run.

Quaritch, flying in his Dragon Gunship, notices Jake's toruk and gives chase. Before Quaritch manages to shoot him down, Trudy dives in with her Samson and strafes the Dragon. Quaritch turns his attention to her, which allows Jake to escape. Trudy fights back, but her Samson is no match for Quaritch's gunship, and she is shot down and killed. Tsu'tey boards the Valkyrie in the hope of preventing it from dropping its payload, but after killing or incapacitating several humans inside the Valkyrie's cargo bay, he is gunned down by a human soldier and falls from the shuttle. Jake calls both Tsu'tey and Trudy but neither answer. He makes contact with Neytiri, who, with her ikran dead, is getting ready to attack the RDA ground forces single-handedly. Jake pleads with her over the communication collar not to, but before she tries; a stampede of hammerhead titanotheres attacks the RDA ground forces, trampling infantry and smashing AMP suits, followed by viperwolves. Neytiri is further surprised when one of Pandora's deadliest creatures, a thanator, allows her to make tsaheylu with it and ride it. The human ground forces break and retreat in panic. In the skies, swarms of wild ikran descend on the surviving RDA gunships, pulling the craft off balance and ripping door gunners out of their stations until only the Valkyrie and Quaritch's Dragon Gunship remain.

The Valkyrie, approaching the Tree of Souls, prepares to drop its payload, but in the ensuing confusion created by the wild [[ikran]] attack, Jake leaps onto the Valkyrie, throwing a grenade into one of its engines before it can drop its payload of mining explosives. The grenade detonates, causing the Valkyrie to collide with a nearby rock, shearing of the left wing and sending the it into a steep dive. The pilots are unable to compensate for the lost of thrust and the ship crashes into the ground and explodes. With all RDA ships except Quaritch's destroyed or in retreat, Jake attempts to destroy the Dragon Gunship the same way he destroyed the Valkyrie. Seeing Jake land on the gunship before he manages to throw his two grenades, Quaritch turns the ship sharply to starboard, nearly throwing Jake off. One grenade is lodged in a small air vent and detonates, ripping a hole in the Dragon's armor, resulting in a few hydraulic-based control failures and exposes the interior crew to Pandoran atmosphere. The falling Jake manages to grab onto one of the Dragon's missile racks. Jake pulls a missile off of the rack and heaves it into the rotor blades of the Dragon's front starboard engine. The resulting explosion destroys the engine and sends the Dragon into an uncontrollable spin. Jake falls from the ship and lands safely in the jungle, breaking his fall with the huge leaves on the trees. Quaritch also escapes his gunship, manning his personal AMP suit and jumping from the ship's cargo bay, fully intent on making a one-man assault on the Tree of Souls.

Stumbling upon the camp containing the avatar link units by chance, Quaritch attempts to destroy Jake's human body, but before he can do so, Neytiri and her thanator attack him, successfully destroying the [[GAU-90]] cannon for Quaritch's AMP suit. However, Quaritch overpowers and kills the thanator with his [[AMP suit knife]]. As he prepares to kill Neytiri, pinned under the thanator's body, Jake arrives to challenge him. The two fight fiercely in close quarters. Jake uses the rifle bayonet for the GAU-90 to fend off the blows of Quaritch's AMP suit. Jake manages to break the AMP suit knife and destroys the AMP's glass canopy, but Quaritch puts on an exopack. The Colonel taunts Jake, asking him how it feels to betray his own race, before turning and attacking the avatar link unit with the suit. Jake manages to fend off Quaritch before he can fully break open the camp, but a window is broken, which allows Pandoran air into the link units. His human body struggling, Jake is easy prey for Quaritch, who is preparing to slit Jake's throat with his own knife when Neytiri kills Quaritch with two shots from her father's bow.

She then tries to wake Jake's avatar, to no avail, while Jake struggles inside the link unit to grab an emergency rebreather. Finally remembering that he is a human, she rushes into the link unit and places an exopack on Jake's now-unconscious human body, saving him again. As Jake wakes up, he says "I See you" to Neytiri and gently strokes her cheek. Neytiri repeats it back to him; the greeting now takes on new meaning as she is seeing and talking to Jake's human body for the first time.

After reconnecting to his avatar, Jake and Neytiri are brought to Tsu'tey, mortally wounded, by a group of surviving Na'vi warriors. Tsu'tey passes leadership of the Omatikaya clan to Jake and requests that he end his suffering. Jake is reluctant, but is assured by Tsu'tey that he will be remembered, as Toruk Makto will be his last shadow, and honors Jake by calling him a brother. Jake remorsefully euthanizes Tsu'tey and recites a prayer for him.

Having put an end to the RDA's occupation of Pandora, Jake makes his last log entry on August 24, 2154, explaining that the humans were sent back to Earth by the Na'vi, except for a few (the scientists of the avatar program), and that he has decided to stay in his avatar form permanently. Returning to the Tree of Souls, he undergoes the consciousness transfer from his human body to his avatar body, and awakens to a new life as a Na'vi, marking August 24 as his "birthday", the day where he truly becomes a Na'vi, a part of The People.

#### Actions as Olo'eyktan

Jake's human body is soon given a traditional Na'vi burial and Jake moves the Omatikaya clan near Hell's Gate to be close to the human allies who were allowed to stay on Pandora. Jake befriends a Na'vi hunter named Ka'ani, who later proves to be a loyal ally to him, and Katherine Hale, a former RDA captain trying to keep Hell's Gate running. Jake also becomes acquainted with the Tayrangi Clan, which he finds to be the neediest when not frequently communicated with.

Two weeks after the transfer, Jake visits his former body's burial site to dig up his body, although he accidentally cuts himself on a plant in the process. Neytiri approaches him, concerned over him spending time near his old body. She informs him she must visit the Olangi Clan due to them suffering the most casualties from the war and needing the most help. Jake agrees with her, thinking about how the other clan's belief in him is getting shaky despite having been Toruk Makto, and sees her off.

Following Neytiri's departure, Jake gets a radio alert from Norm telling him about a fight between Katherine and some of his clan members. Jake arrives by direhorse to find a standoff between Hale and Ka'ani, which he calls off. Katherine informs him they need a new mine since the RDA destroyed the old one before departing Pandora and Jake advises her to strip the old mining equipment and vehicles for the material. Jake also reminds Ka'ani that the remaining Sky People are not like the ones before. Ka'ani assures Jake of his loyalty and sympathizes with the burden of carrying two worlds on his shoulders but reminds Jake that he should be prioritizing the Na'vi.

Shortly after settling the dispute, Jake is with Mo'at overseeing the healing process for injured Na'vi with the remaining medical human doctors, including the fearful Yeyongo and her child. Jake confides in Mo'at about his lack of self-confidence as clan leader and the guilt he is still facing for Hometree's destruction, but Mo'at assures Jake he is stronger than he thinks, and that their new home and him becoming Olo'eyktan was Eywa's will. Tsu'tey's mother, Artsut, becomes angry and argues with Mo'at just before her other son, Arvok, arrives with his father and challenges Jake's position as Olo'eyktan by invoking First Blood. Mo'at warns Jake that the ritual is dangerous, but Jake agrees to fight Arvok regardless.

After the clan is gathered, the battle begins, and Jake easily defeats Arvok by cutting him on the arm and drawing blood. Jake remains in a good mood, which angers Arvok into throwing his knife at Jake. He catches the knife and cuts his hand on it, inadvertently being poisoned and collapsing into a coma. Arvok realizes that his parents had poisoned his knife without his knowledge and runs into the jungle as the clan calls for him to explain, while his parents declare themselves the new clan leaders. However, when realizing Jake is still alive, their authority is moot and Jake is taken to the Tree of Souls to recover.

In his coma, Jake has nightmares where he is tormented by his brother, Miles Quaritch and the deceased Tsu'tey who attempt to guilt trip him, claiming his actions resulted in the deaths and suffering of many. This ends when Jake unintentionally makes tsaheylu with the Tree of Souls and is transported into the Pandoran Neural Network. He is visited by the manifested spirits of Eytukan and Tsu'tey who urge him to forgive himself for his mistakes and offer guidance. Artsut and Ateyo's plan is revealed by Tsu'tey after which he explains to Jake that although their actions were wrong, they had the interests of the Omatikaya at heart, concluding that they needed to be punished for their wrongdoings, but Jake could be merciful towards them in doing so.

Katherine and her team soon deliver an ingredient of an antidote to the tree at Mo'at's request, who then crafts it into a cure for Jake's coma; he wakes up as Artsut and her mate are returning with Arvok. With their plot to overthrow Jake exposed to the rest of the clan, they are brought before Jake for punishment. Jake chooses to exile the family and Arvok states that there is a clan they can join who will shelter them despite their crimes. After they leave, Jake promises the gathered Omatikaya that he'll do his best to lead them to a better future. Jake later visits the grave of his human body again as Neytiri returns from her visit to the Olangi after hearing what happened in her absence. They embrace each other and Neytiri asks Jake if he's okay. Jake downplays the situation to her and she comments that he doesn't seem like himself, but he replies that on the contrary, he's never felt more like himself as he finally leaves his human body behind.

#### Creating a Family and the RDA's return

After years of peace, Jake has settled down with Neytiri and raised a family with three biological children, [[Neteyam]], [[Lo'ak]] and [[Tuktirey]] and an adoptive daughter Kiri born to Grace's avatar. A human boy named Miles Socorro, always called by his nickname Spider, preferred to spend much of his time with the Sully children. Jake describes him like a stray cat who follows the family around. While Jake seemed to accept him, Neytiri, however, believed he should be among his own kind, because he is also the son of Colonel Quaritch.

Jake mentions that not a single day has passed without him in grief over the losses and the deaths that happened during the battle over Hometree and the Tree of Souls, and he feels that those tragic times almost feel as if they happened to someone completely different. Jake also now sports much thicker dreadlocks, making his hairstyle resemble Neytiri's more. Jake has always feared that the RDA will return to Pandora because of Earth's dying resources, viewing their temporary absence as only a matter of time. Almost a decade later since the humans were forced to leave Pandora, they have begun to return with an armada of heavily armed starships.

During Lo'ak's ikran training session, Jake worries although Neytiri insists the danger is part of the trial. When Lo'ak failed to tame the creature and fell off a cliff, Jake tells him he'll try again next time. Later, Jake and Neytiri have a discussion about the danger of the trial. Though they sympathize with each other's viewpoints, Neytiri mentions Jake has been breaking the Three Laws of Eywa by teaching their hunters to use guns made of metal. Jake insists even though he is not human, he still feels he is a marine and that he is still like the Sky People. In Lo'ak's second attempt to tame the ikran, he finally succeeds with Jake feeling very proud of his son and the whole family flying together.

The clan celebrates Lo'ak's success, but Jake still finds it hard to fully enjoy his life because he believes the Sky People will return eventually. When the Omatikaya receives a new hometree at the council of elders, Jake tries to talk to Pentìyaru about the matter, but Neytiri insists they just enjoy themselves for tonight. Neytiri also tries to convince Jake that their people need hope, although Jake feels as if he is lying to his people. He reluctantly accepted the Omatikaya's decision to move into the new Hometree and tried to convince the clan to stay hidden, as once the humans returned, they would surely attack them first and could destroy their home again. Later, Jake asks where Kiri is, and Neytiri sarcastically replies "where do you think she is" to which she obviously is with Spider. In their conversation, Jake defends Spider, explaining to Neytiri that she shouldn't be too hard on him, and explains what the word "sin" means. It even tells the story of the boy and his parents, who were Colonel Quaritch and [[Paz Socorro]] who conceived Spider, the latter also died in the battle, hit by an arrow, Jake wonders if had anything to do with this. Finally, he mentions that he just hopes that Spider doesn't turn out to be like his father.

After the two put their kids to sleep, Jake and Neytiri go on a night date, riding their ikrans across the floating mountains. As they rest on the ground, Jake looks up and sees a massive light in the sky, making him along with Neytiri realize that the RDA is back much to their horror.

#### Preparing for the RDA's return

Later, Jake holds a group meeting with the Na'vi where he insists they must fight the Sky People again to drive them away. For now, Jake insists everyone move to the Hallelujah Mountains which causes controversy. Meanwhile, one member of the RDA is tasked with killing Jake. Jake and Norm go to Hell's Gate where they discover there are 10 RDA ships. The Na'vi begin training in zero gravity, although Jake refuses to let one of his boys fight in the upcoming battle.

In a council meeting, Jake insists the Na'vi fight and tries to convince Yeyatley to agree, but Yeyatley instead insists the Na'vi offer peace instead. Akwey supports Jake's choice, though before the group can continue debating, they notice Jake's children are gone with the exception of Neteyam. They eventually find the children. Jake blames Lo'ak, though Spider admits he also deserves some blame. Neytiri agrees that Spider is at fault and orders him to stay away from Kiri, claiming they will never see each other again

A widespread message from General [[Frances Ardmore]] is heard, offering amnesty for those "illegally" occupying Hell's Gate. This causes many of the humans to panic and feel defeated. Jake tries to motivate the humans, but Mary expresses her concerns on why they should probably surrender. Jake says those who wish to fight to come with him for now to evacuate. Jake and Neytiri talk about their upcoming plan to fight the RDA in space. Neteyam does not wish to remain at High Camp, instead wishing to fight, though Jake again declines the offer. As the Sully family prepares to go their own ways, Kiri cannot be found. Jake and Neytiri find Kiri and Spider talking to Nash McCosker. Although Jake and Neytiri think Spider is best with his foster family, Kiri became upset and flees in anger with Jake being told by Neytiri not to follow in order to give Kiri time to process.

Jake and Neytiri "purify" their spirits with Mo'at by inflicting pain on themselves because they believe it should be done before they betray Eywa by using steel weapons and breaking the Three Laws of Eywa. Jake visits a tree and uses it to string himself up and inflict great pain on his body; the pain makes him remember the suffering of his deceased allies, and he reflects on how much he values Neytiri and his children. They depart on their space shuttle and Ardmore contacts them via a video message. Jake's team tries to blackmail the RDA by threatening destroy Hell's Gate and several other structures on Pandora that the RDA desire to reclaim. Ardmore's team agrees they will talk physically. As the Na'vi are in their shuttle, Jake and Neytiri are displeased to see that Neteyam has sneaked on board.

#### Witnessing the RDA's Return

Sometime after the RDA returns, several of their ships, including the ISV Manifest Destiny, descend downwards through the moon's atmosphere rather than staying in orbit. Their high engines' thrust send firestorms right down to the ground and into the jungle, causing a region of the forest including most Hometrees to be burned down and the local fauna that were evacuating from the firestorms were burned to death as a result. When the RDA dropped their Landing Module onto the scorched land, they started removing the remains of the animals and vegetation of the forest with their bulldozers.

Jake and Neytiri reached safely to higher ground along with the surviving animals and started watching the fires from afar. After seeing the burning, Jake cradles a distraught Neytiri as she started weeping due to the horror of the sight of the burned forest along with the rest of the animals as the destruction lead to the Omatikaya's land becoming torn apart due to the ongoing actions of the RDA.

#### Moving to the Metkayina Clan

Jake leads a guerrilla operation against a Mag-Lev transporting resources to the new [[Bridgehead]] base, destroying the railway. Jake had assigned his sons as lookouts. Lo'ak, however, wanted to engage in direct combat, disobeying orders with Neteyam who tried to stop him. A kestrel gunship appeared and began attacking them, with Neteyam missing and Jake initially fearing that his son was dead, but eventually found him slightly injured. Jake helps Neteyam out of the battlefield, and after returning to the [[High Camp]], he berates his sons for both disobeying his orders and endangering their safety. He then punishes Lo'ak for a month without flying.

That night, while tending to his own wounds, Neytiri calmly reminds Jake to be not too hard on his sons, to which Jake expresses his fear of losing them and his need to be strict on them. Meanwhile, the attack on the RDA supply lines does not sit well with Ardmore, and she sends a squad called Recombinants, led by Miles Quaritch (reborn as Recom with the memories of the Colonel himself) on a search-to-kill mission. at Jake for his interference and in his eyes, for terrorism.

A few days later, Jake was called by Lo'ak about suspicious armed blue people at the abandoned Site 26. Jake orders Lo'ak, his sisters and Spider to leave quickly and quietly. Jake, Neytiri and Neteyam fly on their ikrans to rescue the children. After a brief fight, the Sully family manages to escape, but Spider is kidnapped. Aware of Quaritch’s return to life and the danger Spider's knowledge poses to their safety, and also to avoid further persecution of the Omatikaya clan, Jake tries to convince Neytiri to banish themselves and retreat to the [[Metkayina clan]]'s waterworld.

his results in an argument with Neytiri who refuses to leave her clan, saying that the forest is all the children know, and she herself cannot leave her people since her father entrusted her with protecting the clan. Jake explains that the children are in mortal danger, especially since Spider was captured by Quaritch and may end up giving their location away, as well as the latter being in the area and already had their children literally under the edge of his knife. Jake convinces her leaving the clan will keep their immediate family safer, feeling their children's safety should be prioritized over the war. Although devastated, Neytiri finally accepts the idea. Jake gives up his position as Olo'eyktan and hands leadership of the clan over to his trusted ally Tarsem, a young but wise Na'vi.

After migrating across the sea to the reef clan, Jake asks [[uturu]] from the clan leader, Tonowari. However, his mate [[Ronal]] is incredibly skeptical, even criticizing his cowardice, causing Neytiri to defend Jake as the one who helped resist the Sky People. Jake's request ends up being accepted, though [[Tonowari]] insists they learn sea life and pull their own weight. He assigns his children [[Aonung]] and [[Tsireya]] to train the Sully children. The family gets their own marui and Jake calls everyone in for a family chat. He asks the children to be respectful, not to cause trouble, and to diligently learn the customs. Tuktirey breaks down in tears and says she wants to go home, to which Jake says this is their home now.

During the tutoring, Tonowari teaches Jake how to ride a [[skimwing]], a mount resembling a large flying-fish that can dive underwater or flit just above the surface. Tonowari offered Jake to ride an [[ilu]], fearing he wouldn't be able to cope with such a difficult animal to tame, but Jake insisted on the skimwing. When he first rides the creature, he fails on the first try, but manages to finally ride one.

When Lo'ak and Neteyam get into a fight with Aonung and other boys for bullying Kiri, Jake harshly reprimands them, pointing out that they ignored his order to stay out of trouble. He tells Lo'ak to apologize to Aonung for hitting him. Jake asks Neteyam if the other boys looked worse, to which Neteyam replies that they look much worse than them.

Later, Jake asks Kiri her why she seems upset. She confesses that she feels different; that she can feel a connection to Eywa and can feel her heartbeat, which she describes as "mighty" and Jake assures her that she's not crazy. Their conversation is interrupted when Neteyam arrives, dragging Aonung away to tell his father that he tricked Lo'ak into hunting beyond the village reef and left him there. With the help of the clan, Jake searches for his son and finally finds him and takes him home, unaware that a [[tulkun]] had taken him back after saving him. Although Jake understood from Tonowari that Aonung was at fault, Lo'ak decides to cover it up and says that hunting off the reef was his idea, prompting Jake to admonish his son and say that he has shamed his family.

After Kiri suffers a seizure from connecting to the [[Spirit Tree]], Jake contacts Norm and Max and they fly to help Kiri. Later, Ronal steps in to help her. While the Tsahìk performs a medical ritual on Kiri, Jake argues with Norm and Max about what happened. He tells them about Kiri's mysterious abilities and how she can sense Eywa, but to his chagrin, Norm dismisses the problem with a scientific diagnosis, considering them to be typical symptoms of epilepsy, and warns him to prevent Kiri from reconnecting with the Spirit Tree because it might kill her on the second try. Ronal was finally able to wake Kiri from her coma. Jake's call to Norm and Max inadvertently allowed the RDA to track them down.

As Jake and his family pack up, they hear an alarm, and Tsireya tells them that the tulkuns have come home. Riding his skimwing with Neytiri, Jake watches the tulkuns and points out a mother with her calf to Neytiri. Later, Jake received word from Tonowari that the Sky People have attacked the local clans and are looking for him. Neytiri thinks they should find Quaritch and kill him, though Jake is reluctant and thinks it's a reckless move, saying it would give away their location. Shortly after, Jake learns of Lo'ak's friendship with Payakan, the tulkun who saved Lo'ak's life. Jake and Neytiri listen to Tonowari explain to Lo'ak the Tulkun Way and why Payakan is an outcast, although Lo'ak did not accept Tonowari's words. Jake silenced Lo'ak and told Tonowari he would deal with him.

#### Skirmish at the Three Brothers

When they discover the corpse of Ro'a, Ronal's spiritual sister, murdered by tulkun hunters, Jake discovers a tracking device embedded in her body. Jake immediately realizes that Quaritch has tracked down his hideout and is looking for him in the archipelago, and that the device must lead the Colonel to him. Tonowari convenes a council of war in which he urges revenge on the Sky People, to which the clansmen react approvingly. Jake tries to talk them out of this idea by convincing them not to attack humans. He shows them the red device, explains how it works, and asks them to persuade their tulkuns to run as far away from the village as possible instead of attacking them, and to call him if they find any tulkuns with tracking tags, as it is a death sentence and the Metkayina accept his suggestion.

Jake soon hears from Lo'ak's communicator that the children are in danger out in the ocean, prompting the entire clan to take offenses against the RDA. Jake, Neytiri and the Metkayina clan arrive at the Three Brothers on their skimwings to confront the RDA fleet, seeing the kids cuffed to the deck railing. Before the battle, Quaritch contacts Jake by radio and gives him an ultimatum to surrender or risk having his children killed. Ronal admonishes Jake for being the reason that the battle has reached the Metkayina. Realizing that the battle was always between himself and Quaritch, Jake decides to surrender to avoid further bloodshed on Pandora. However, seeing his friend Lo'ak imperiled, Payakan slams onto the ship, giving the clan a chance to attack. Jake manages to destroy two of the boats, exploding one and causing the other to violently run aground.

After much of the fighting, the SeaDragon is left to crash and sink. Neteyam loses his life after being shot. Grief-stricken, Jake decides to face Quaritch once and for all, when the latter radios to reveal that he has recaptured Tuk and Kiri. Jake and Neytiri stealthily climb to the top deck of the SeaDragon, with Spider leading them due to his knowledge of the vessel. Jake uses a grenade to detonate the crashed Seawasp, killing many of the remaining RDA troops and evacuees. In the chaos, Jake and Neytiri attack the survivors on the top deck, killing Recoms Prager and Zdinarsik before working their way down to the moon pool where Tuk and Kiri are held.

Wainfleet commands Recom Mansk and the remaining soldiers on the lower deck, but Jake beats both Recombinants unconscious and knocks Wainfleet into the sea. Jake cuts off Kiri and Tuk's cuffs before engaging Quaritch in a fistfight that ends with the Recom snatching Kiri at knifepoint. However, Neytiri intercedes, similarly holding Spider at knifepoint. At first, Quaritch claims his son is inconsequential, but he ultimately releases Kiri when Neytiri cuts Spider's chest. Quaritch and Jake resume fighting, and Jake gets the upper hand. Jake strangles Quaritch into unconsciousness and is almost drowned himself. However, he is rescued by Lo'ak who teaches him the way of water, and the two are helped by Payakan. The family embraces in the ocean and Jake tells Lo'ak he sees him.

In the aftermath, Jake and his family sorrowfully conduct Neteyam's funeral according to Metkayina customs and lay his body to rest in the [[Cove of the Ancestors]] where it is absorbed by the Spirit Tree. Jake then proceeds to inform Tonowari and Ronal of his decision to leave the reef and move far away. Tonowari, however, respectfully identifies him as part of the Metkayina clan and welcomes his family to stay. Humbled, Jake vows that he and his family will defend Awa'atlu, their new home.

Neteyam's memory is then visited within Eywa by his parents at the Spirit Tree. Neteyam's memory is unaware of his death and wonders why Jake is weeping. Wishing for the two of them to be able to enjoy a peaceful moment together, Jake only replies that he is simply happy to see him. Neytiri watches Jake and Neteyam from afar and weeps. Jake then has an epiphany about how he can no longer run away from the RDA and must fight them.

#### Meeting the Tlalim

Jake retrieving guns upsets Tonowari and Ronal who comment he is not following the Na'vi Way. They implore him to give up his guns, but he refuses. While Neytiri and Jake are in their marui, Jake and Neytiri have a tense conversation in which Jake loses faith in Eywa. Neytiri tells him her faith is all she has left, but Jake reminds her she has her family.

When the [[Tlalim clan]] arrives at Awa'atlu, there is an agreement between [[Peylak]] and Jake for the convoy to only transport Spider. Jake's presence, however, causes a political disturbance, as his history of being Toruk Makto makes it seem like the Windtraders are picking a side in the war. Jake attempts to mitigate the situation by offering to be an outsider to protect the convoy on their travels. Peylak gives in and the clan departs.

On the way, the trading ships convoy are ambushed by a new, aggressive Na'vi clan, the [[Mangkwan clan]], also called the Ash People, led by [[Varang]]. They set fire to the ships causing them to crash to the ground. The ash people loot the ship and sadistically kill all of the survivors. Jake, Neytiri and the children are separated. Jake is held hostage by Quaritch and Wainfleet, and they venture to find Spider. Jake and Quaritch witness Varang's clan threaten the children. Kiri winds up saving the group, and Jake tries to convince Quaritch to understand Pandora's beauty and life, and to motivate the RDA to change its ways. Eventually, Jake is found by his allies from High Camp, while Quaritch sneaks off.

Jake returns to Awa'atlu. However, the Mangkwan clan and Quaritch also arrive. Jake surrenders himself to avoid war and is arrested by the RDA. He is taken to Bridgehead to face execution and placed in a large class cage in front of humans who take videos and images of him, having branded him a traitor to the human race. Quaritch enters the cage to talk to Jake and tells him that Varang wants Jake's heart, but Jake will be executed via a firing squad instead.

## Age

| Year            | Species | Chronologically | Physically      | Age of Consciousness |
| :-------------- | ------- | --------------- | --------------- | -------------------- |
| 2148 (on Earth) | Human   | 22-years-old    | 22-years-old    | 22-years-old         |
| 2154 (A1 start) | Human   | 28-years-old    | 22-years-old    | 22-years-old         |
| 2154 (A1 end)   | Human   | 29-years-old    | 23-years-old    | 23-years-old         |
| 2154 (A1)       | Avatar  | c. 6-years-old  | c. 17-years-old | c. 22/23-years-old   |
| 2169 (TWoW)     | Avatar  | c. 21-years-old | c. 33-years-old | c. 38-years-old      |
