_**James Cameron's Avatar: The Game**_ is an _Avatar_ video game prequel of James Cameron's film of the same name. The title is developed by Ubisoft Montreal and published by Ubisoft, Lightstorm Entertainment, and 20th Century Fox. It was released for the PC, PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 in late 2009.
Although the PC version of the game was once on Steam, it was delisted a few years later and is now considered abandonware due to Ubisoft not offering the game on any of their stores.

The game was confirmed to be non-canon to the Avatar franchise in 2023 during an interview with Joshua Izzo.

Another major Ubisoft Avatar game known as _[[Avatar: Frontiers of Pandora]]_ released in 2023.

## Synopsis

The video game takes place two years prior to the events in the movie. In the game, players take the role of Lance Corporal Able Ryder, a [[SecOps]] signal specialist who arrives on the distant world Pandora, hand-picked to take part in the [[Avatar Program]]. Ryder learns to pilot their own avatar, a hybrid of human DNA and that of Pandora's indigenous species, the [[Na'vi]]. As Ryder ventures further into the Pandoran jungle, they learn more about its many creatures of Pandora, the Na'vi, and their struggle with the corporation to save Pandora. At the flashpoint of this conflict, Ryder must decide where their true allegiance lie: with either the RDA, or the Na'vi.

Ryder's gender and appearance are customizable by the player.

## Plot

Ryder is on a shuttle to Pandora and listens to Dr. Grace Augustine warn about how Dr. René Harper should not be disappointed and how Pandora is dangerous, but to keep a cautious and open mind about it. Ryder arrives at Hell's Gate after landing on Pandora, and meets officer Kendra Midori. Ryder then meets Dr. Victor Monroe, the head of the Avatar Program, and then Commander Karl Falco who explains that a mole is relaying information to the local Na'vi clan, the Tipani.

#### Blue Lagoon

Ryder is then sent to the Blue Lagoon to aid soldiers trapped by viperwolves. After rescuing one named Dalton, Ryder volunteers to complete the soldier's signalling work. Connecting to their avatar, Ryder reports to Dr. René Harper and aids him by collecting cell samples. After a few other minor tasks, Ryder is ordered by Falco to follow a Na'vi called Tan Jala, as it is believed he would be meeting the mole - who turns out to be none other than Harper himself.

Harper shows Ryder the burnt remains of the Na'vi Reservation, revealing the target of the signal Ryder locked for Dalton. Falco and two SecOps troopers arrive in a Samson transport ship and order Harper to surrender. Harper tries to angrily persuade Ryder to join him and the Na'vi, while Falco orders Ryder to shoot Harper. The remainder of the game depends on the player's choice in this standoff.

#### Na'vi Storyline

If Ryder chooses to help Harper and join the Na'vi, Ryder opens fire at the RDA troops and injures Falco, then escapes with Harper to Iknimaya at Vayaha Village. Harper then leads an attack to capture the avatar link beds of Ryder and himself, commenting that if he is not successful, they are finished. Meanwhile, Ryder begins to earn the trust of Beyda'amo, whom distrusts Ryder immensely as he despises traitors. After completing a number of small missions, Ryder is tasked with completing Iknimaya so that he may use a mountain banshee in combat.

Soon after, a Dragon assault ship is sent to kill both Ryder and Harper. Ryder destroys the Dragon by crippling the engines. The Dragon then nearly crashes into the link beds of both Ryder and Harper. Three more dragons appear and bombard the camp, destroying the link beds. In an effort to save the two, the Tipani clan Tsahìk, Sänume, attempts to transfer the consciousness of both Ryder and Harper, wielding success for Ryder but Harper succumbing to his wounds. Ryder, now no longer a human, is told that Vitraya Ramunong, the dormant Well of Souls, needs to be found as Falco seeks it to control the Na'vi population. This can only be done by finding Unobtanium Shards that can be used with special willow trees to generate a harmonic which in turn aides in locating the long forgotten site.

Ryder is sent to Swotulu to find the first three unobtanium shards and the harmonic with the aid of Lungoray. Lungoray cannot be found initially but he is located after completing missions for his student, Unipey. After capturing the three shards and beginning to activate the willow tree, Lungoray is killed by an RDA sniper. Tan Jala tells Ryder to capture the harmonic, despite the fact Ryder knows nothing of how to capture a harmonic. However, Ryder collects the harmonic and travels back to Hometree, bringing the Na'vi closer to finding the dormant Well of Souls.

At this point, the Tsahìk suggests that Ryder is the First Voice, the one who is needed to activate the dormant Well of Souls. Ryder plays down this suggestion but the Tsahìk comments that they have succeeded where many Na'vi have failed. Ryder travels to other locations such as Torukä Na'rìng, where they successfully capture the harmonic and assists destroying the RDA forces which were retreating from the area, and additionally travelling to Va'erä Ramunong, clearing areas of RDA military and re-establishing the Na'vi majority in the area as well as collecting another harmonic and establishing a more exact estimate regarding the location of the dormant Well of Souls. Throughout these regions, Beyda'amo grows increasingly impatient with Ryder despite Ryder's best efforts at assisting the Na'vi.

Upon traveling to Kxanìa Taw and attempting to collect the first shard, the RDA destroy it. Despite this, Ryder continues to assist the local Na'vi population but when attempting to collect the second shard, it is destroyed again by the RDA. Beyda'amo, growing increasingly impatient and aggressive towards Ryder, orders them to assist with the attack on the main local RDA base to capture the last of the three unobtanium shards. Upon invading the base and breaking through to the willow tree previously blocked off by RDA fences, Ryder tells Beyda'amo about the lack of the first two unobtanium shards. Beyda'amo responds aggressively, threatening to attack. Ryder stuns Beyda'amo by activating the willow tree without the shards, confirming they are the Ni'awve Mokri, the First Voice.

After traveling to a few more locations, Ryder arrives at Tantalus and after a brief mission, a great leonopteryx aides Ryder to get to the dormant Well of Souls. A cutscene begins with Falco approaching the still dormant Well of Souls in a Dragon assault ship. However, just as Falco prepares to fire on Ryder, the Well of Souls activates and acts as an EMP against the Dragon, sending it and Falco to their doom. Ryder then meets with Tan Jala and the game ends with Ryder saying that more humans will come, then fading to black.

#### RDA Storyline

If Ryder chooses to side with the RDA, Ryder opens fire on Harper. He is soon forced against a cliff edge, and before Harper leaps off the cliff, he shoots Ryder's avatar with a Na'vi bow, subsequently killing the avatar. Ryder's human body is unharmed and is soon awakened, then taken aboard a Samson for a flight back to Hell's Gate. While Ryder and Kendra are heading back to Hell's Gate, the Samson is attacked by mountain banshees and forced down on an area known as Needle Hills. As the pilot is badly wounded and Kendra tends to his wounds, Ryder heads alone to a nearby RDA mining center to obtain a Scorpion gunship. After destroying several banshee nests to clear the airspace and rescuing Kendra (the pilot succumbed to his wounds and died), Ryder receives the order to collect unobtanium shards to obtain harmonics from unobtanium willow trees to find the dormant Well of Souls; the first destination is at Needle Hills where, after killing many Na'vi and helping the RDA to secure the whole Needle Hills area, Ryder ultimately finds the three shards needed, and thus finds a waypoint that will help lead the RDA to the dormant Well of Souls.

Arriving back at Hell's Gate, Ryder gives the unobtanium shards to Victor Monroe, who then gives them to his scientists for installation into the Emulator, which will allow the RDA to control Eywa, the planetary "hive mind" of Pandora. Falco then orders Ryder to several other areas to obtain more unobtanium shards: the FEBA (Forward Edge of the Battle Area), Grave's Bog, and the Hanging Gardens (named after the rapidly growing plant life which overtook an earlier RDA Base). Through these missions, Trudy Chacón is tasked as Ryder's personal Samson pilot after the death of the previous pilot.

After several trips and more shard collection, Ryder has collected enough shards for RDA scientists to pinpoint the exact location of the dormant Well of Souls. During this time, Ryder helps the RDA establish firm control over many contested areas, such as the FEBA, which holds the dubious distinction of being the area responsible for the most RDA casualties. Ryder also kills many Na'vi leaders, such as Beyda'amo, the ferocious leader of the Tipani clan in the FEBA; Tan Jala, the most cunning and charismatic of the Tipani in Grave's Bog; and finally Harper and his two traitorous colleagues in the Hanging Gardens. However, when Ryder arrives back at Hell's Gate for the final missions, they discover from Kendra that Commander Falco has gone rogue, killed Monroe, stolen the Emulator, and is headed for the dormant Well of Souls himself. Ryder knows that configuring the Emulator requires an expert hand, and that Falco's eager tampering could result in the destruction of Pandora and the death of all living things on it. Thus, while Kendra contacts RDA High Command to notify them of Falco's desertion, Ryder heads to the Plains of Goliath, an area close to the dormant Well of Souls, where RDA and Na'vi forces are waging the final battle.

There, Ryder is contacted by Colonel Miles Quaritch, who orders them to eliminate the three nearby Na'vi leaders who are rallying their forces against the RDA offensive. The first leader, Swawta, attempts to persuade Ryder to join the Na'vi, which Ryder then "politely" declines by killing Swawta. Afterward, Ryder is shuttled back to Central Command and is ordered to kill another leader, a ferocious thanator rider, Hukato. After doing so, Ryder kills one more leader and is given a Dragon Assault Ship for the trek to Tantalus across the Hallelujah Mountains, where the Well of Souls is located.

Arriving at Tantalus, Ryder is greeted by Operations Specialist (Ops-Spec) Welles at a local RDA base. He orders Ryder to help clear the local area surrounding the Well of Souls so it is safe to journey there, and so RDA forces can force the "blues" out of the vital area. Ryder is then ordered to obtain heavy demolition charges from "Boom Boom" Batista in order to blast open a large rock wall that Na'vi forces are sheltering behind, as it serves as a natural defensive fortification for the Na'vi, and hazardously heavy electro-magnetic storms are preventing RDA gunships from simply flying over the rock wall and bombing them. After several intense battles with heavy Na'vi casualties, RDA ground reinforcements arrive and buy Ryder enough time to install the demo-charges and trigger them from a safe distance. Once the rock wall comes crumbling down, RDA Scorpion gunships fly in and bomb the Na'vi forces to oblivion, which eliminates the last major Na'vi stronghold in Tantalus. Ryder soon encounters Ops-Spec Welles again, standing beside an AMP suit amidst numerous Na'vi corpses in the smoldering ruins of a village. Welles excitedly tells Ryder that the area is now secure and that the RDA can "take it to the blues". Their military objectives completed, Ryder then boards the Dragon for a final confrontation with a rogue Falco.

As Ryder disembarks from the Dragon and comes upon the Well of Souls, they shout that Falco is insane and that the Emulator will kill everyone on Pandora if improperly handled. Falco simply shrugs off this warning and opens fire, forcing Ryder to kill him. As Ryder begins to configure the Emulator for its activation, Na'vi-mounted banshees attempt to attack Ryder. However, Ryder completes the Emulator's activation protocols and it immediately activates, severing the Na'vi from Eywa. The attacking banshees then violently force off their Na'vi riders and flee, causing the Na'vi to fall to their doom.

At last, Ryder receives a radio transmission from Quaritch who says that Na'vi all across Pandora have lost control of their war animals, and are retreating en-masse from every defensive position. Quaritch then congratulates Ryder for greatly helping RDA forces to win the day, and tells him that, "Your Dragon better be spotless when you get back". Before Ryder can leave, he is contacted by Dr. Grace Augustine, who tells him that the war isn't over and that Eywa is planning something; she also says that more humans are arriving on Pandora, and the RDA will have to be more vigilant than ever. With Grace's closing lines, the game ends as Ryder stands before the now active Well of Souls, with the Emulator pulsing in the background.

#### RDA playthrough, choosing to side with Na'vi at request of Swawta

When choosing to side with the Na'vi when given the choice by Swawta during the final stages of the game, the game continues similarly to choosing to side with the Na'vi at the initial stages of the game. Exceptions include the absence of a great leonopteryx to take the player to the Well of Souls and the player in his human form, not avatar. The Na'vi stop attacking Ryder while the RDA becomes hostile.

If the player chooses this ending, the same cutscene will play out as if Ryder defected to the Na'vi at the first opportunity. This includes the oversight of Tan Jala being present and speaking to Ryder, despite Ryder having killed him earlier in the story.
