_**Lo'ak te Suli Tsyeyk'itan**_ is a main character in [[Avatar: The Way of Water]] and [[Avatar: Fire and Ash]], where he is the narrator. He is the youngest son of [[Jake Sully]] and [[Neytiri]] as well as the brother of [[Neteyam]], his younger sister [[Tuktirey]] and his adoptive sister [[Kiri]].

When the [[RDA]] returned to [[Pandora]], Lo'ak wanted to fight alongside his parents but they dismissed the idea. When they were attacked by [[Miles Quaritch]] and the Recombinants, Lo'ak and his family fled to the [[Metkayina clan]]. He learned their ways, forming a close bond with a [[tulkun]] named [[Payakan]] and [[Tsireya]], daughter of the clan's leaders. Lo'ak questioned and attempted to challenge the clan's views on Payakan's guilt, but this was to no avail as the adults refused to believe him. After his escape from the SeaDragon thanks to Payakan, Lo'ak lost Neteyam while saving [Spider](/spider), but was still able to save his father's life using The Way of Water.

## Biography

### Early life

Lo'ak was born into the [Omatikaya clan], as the second son of Jake and Neytiri a year after [[Neteyam]]. He is the only one of the three biological children who was born with five fingers and faint eyebrows like an avatar, which also means he resembles his father Jake the most physically, although did inherit some of his mother's looks, such as a narrower facial shape.

Growing up, Lo'ak has never really felt truly as being part of his own family and clan, making him feel alone even when surrounded by people. While he feels different from his siblings [[Tuktirey]] and Neteyam, his adoptive sister Kiri was the one he felt the closest to, although they would still fight over things such as their toys. Lo'ak and Kiri became close friends with [Spider Socorro](/spider), a human boy.

At some point in time, he learned how to weave a woven pattern from his grandmother Mo'at, as weaving is one of the Omatikaya's specialties.

### Return of the RDA

While trying to tame his ikran during his Iknimaya, Lo'ak has difficulty controlling the animal which bit his leg. Disturbed and frightened, Jake wanted to end the trial but Neytiri disagreed, explaining that the danger is supposed to be part of this. Lo'ak, however, gets accidentally thrown off a cliff and falls from a great height and loses consciousness. When he wakes up, he is eager to resume the failed attempt, but Jake states that he will return to it another day. The event would later result in an argument between Jake and Neytiri on how much they should follow traditional Na'vi ways. On his next attempt, Lo'ak managed to tame another ikran, and the whole family took a flight together. The clan later celebrated Lo'ak's accomplishment.

After that, the Na'vi noticed new spaceships approaching Pandora. While their parents were attending the council of elders Lo'ak, Kiri, Tuk and Spider decide to secretly go exploring because they think a council meeting is going to take forever and they don't want to be bored. They visit the remains of the Pandoran War where they find a human skeleton in a Samson's cockpit. Lo'ak and Spider end up almost accidentally killing Kiri and Tuktirey when the Samson falls. Spider begins to run low on oxygen and the kids try to find their way back home. Meanwhile, Jake and Neytiri form a search party for the children after seeing them go missing. They eventually find the children. Jake blames Lo'ak, though Spider admits he also deserves some blame.

After the RDA announces their return to [[Pandora]], Lo'ak is ordered to go to [[High Camp]] under [[Mo'at]]'s supervision, along with the rest of his siblings. Kiri comes across Tuk and Lo'ak, and the two later follow her when she decides to go for Spider. The siblings go get Spider who hears knocking on his bedroom window. They are soon found by Nash McCosker who says they can be useful, however, he traps Spider and the siblings in separate rooms. Spider manages to escape and free everyone. The family becomes involved in another chase and flees into the forest. After a series of events involving a crash landing into the ocean, the group is rescued by Wu Mingxia and [[Norm Spellman]].

### Encounter with the Recombinants

To prevent the RDA from exploiting Pandora again, Jake leads an ongoing strategic guerrilla operation aimed at weakening RDA supply lines. In one of these missions, a raid on a maglev train, Jake's sons are assigned to act as spotters. Lo'ak, who is eager to prove himself, disobeys his father's orders and tries to assist in the battle. However, when more RDA forces arrive in Kestrel gunships, Lo'ak became overwhelmed and Neteyam is wounded trying to protect him. Jake rescues and then disciplines both his sons, warning them to not endanger their own safety for his sake by being reckless and since Lo'ak almost got his brother killed, he was given a punishment by his father and was not allowed to fly for a month as a result.

Soon after Neteyam's wounds are treated, Lo'ak, Kiri, and Spider visit High Camp's biolab, where [[Grace Augustine]]'s dormant avatar is located. An argument ensued among the boys over who Kiri's father was, Lo'ak unanimously, albeit jokingly, pointing the finger at Norm.

During a playful venture in the forest with Lo'ak, Tuk and Kiri, Spider recognizes that they are near the place where their father fought his father, and Lo'ak decides to explore it, knowing it is against Jake's rules. Unbeknownst to them, Quaritch and his 1st Recom squad are reconnoitering the same site. An observant Lo'ak spots the Recoms, and quickly radios his father to inform him of their location. However, a skirmish occurs, and the Recoms easily capture Jake's children. They identify the children as Jake's due to Lo'ak and Kiri having recessive human traits such as five fingers. Lo'ak also gives Quaritch the double finger. The children are saved by Jake and Neytiri, although Spider is captured. Knowing that Quaritch is hunting them down, the Sully family flies to coastal regions of the Metkayina clan searching for protection at [[Awa'atlu]].

### Living with the Metkayina clan

Arriving at the village, their reception was less than welcome by the [[Olo'eyktan]] [[Tonowari]], especially by the [[Tsahìk]] [[Ronal]], who almost immediately pointed to the five-fingered hands of Lo'ak and Kiri, saying that they have "demon blood". Lo'ak was clearly disgusted by this distinctive anatomical detail that had once again been pointed out to him. Eventually, the family was accepted into the Metkayina clan. The children immediately start learning with [[Tsireya]] and Aon[[ung, the children of the clan leaders, and [[Rotxo]]. Lo'ak pays special attention to Tsireya early on and they become friends. She teaches him how to ride an [[ilu]] and freedive, controlling his breathing as he swims, and also teaches him the philosophy of their clan's deep connection to the ocean: The Way of Water.

As he adjusts to their new environment, Lo'ak witnesses Aonung and his friends insult Kiri by calling her "weird", "not true Na'vi" and asking whether she is a freak. He defends his sister although he also becomes the object of ridicule of the group. He was about to fight with them, but Neteyam stopped them. He threatened them and pushed his siblings away from them, but Aonung hurled another insult as he left, eventually taunting Lo'ak. Lo'ak punches Aonung in the face and a fight broke out which Neteyam also joined. Later, Jake admonishes his sons for their behavior. At Jake's insistence, Lo'ak returns to apologize to Aonung and his friends.

Aonung's group tried to persuade Lo'ak to hunt with them outside the reef. Lo'ak initially refused as his parents told him not to go there, however, he wanted to carry favor with Aonung, and was also envious at the mention of Neteyam, whose courage he wanted to equalize. When they take him to the [[Three Brothers]] while he is hunting, Aonung's group tricked him by abandoning him there as revenge, leaving him alone in that place. Lo'ak is attacked by an akula, a large marine predator. He manages to escape from it by hiding between coral. Due to being underwater for a while, he is forced to rise up to the surface. The akula spots and attacks Lo'ak who desperately faces the creature, armed with only a knife. Starting to drown, he is saved at the last moment by a [[tulkun]], an intelligent and pacifistic cetacean species whom the Metkayina consider their spiritual family.

Waking up, he found himself on the tulkun's back and thanks him for saving his life. When he notices a rusty old harpoon stuck in his right fin, he helps to get it out. He spends time with the tulkun and learns that he is able to communicate with it; eventually they become friends. Back at Awa'atlu, Lo'ak returns to the village that night, looking at the stars with the tulkun and points out the star from which his father comes. Seeing a search party with his father in the distance and not wanting his friend to be seen, Lo'ak sent the tulkun away before obediently returning to the village. There he was reprimanded again by Jake, although Tonowari had explained that it was Aonung's fault for taking him beyond the reef. However, Lo'ak, not wanting Aonung to suffer the same as him, decided to take the blame for having been his idea to hunt far from the village; in this way, he gained Aonung's favor and friendship, despite being reprimanded by his father who said Lo'ak brought shame to his family.

In the morning Lo'ak tells Tsireya and the others about the tulkun who saved him, but she soon realizes that the tulkun who saved him is [[Payakan]], a male who was cast out for murder in the past, but Lo'ak refuses to believe and leaves after Neteyam ridicules the story. Determined to find the reason why Payakan became an outcast, Lo'ak returns to the Three Brothers Rocks and asks Payakan why he was exiled, but Payakan replies it is too painful for him to discuss. The two instead spend the day playing together so Lo'ak does not visit the [[Cove of the Ancestors]] with the other children, and is absent for Kiri's seizure at the [[Spirit Tree]], although he is present later when Ronal helps her wake up. When the tulkun returned to the village, Tsireya presents Lo'ak to her spiritual sister. During the celebration, Lo'ak seems sad that Payakan is absent.

Later, Lo'ak continues to ask Payakan why he is outcasted and Payakan decides to share the reason this time. Lo'ak swims inside Payakan's mouth and connects his queue. Unbeknownst to him, he is watched by Neteyam, Tsireya, Aonung and Rotxo. He sees Payakan's memories and finds out that he was exiled for going against the pacifist ways of his species known as the Tulkun Way. Payakan had lost his mother to RDA whalers and led an attack with a group of young tulkun and Na'vi to avenge her death. All attackers were killed except for Payakan. Lo'ak feels great pity and empathy for Payakan after this revelation, because Lo'ak also feels like an outcast among his family, living in his brother's shadow.

Lo'ak returns to the village and is scolded by Tonowari and Ronal who also scold Tsireya for letting him bond with the outcast. Lo'ak instead defends Payakan, saying he saved his life and that Tonowari does not truly know him. Tonowari demands everyone sit down and he explains the Tulkun Way and why Payakan is outcasted. Lo'ak instead speaks out against this, saying he knows what he knows and that Tonowari is wrong. Lo'ak claimed Tonowari simply did not understand Payakan who, in Lo'ak's eyes, could not be a bloodthirsty killer. Lo'ak's insubordinate attitude offended his parents; Jake silences Lo'ak and takes him away to deal with.

Later at sunset, Tsireya tells Lo'ak that she saw a forest youth chosen by a tulkun and is proud of him for bonding. Lo'ak explains to Tsireya that Payakan is not a murderer, he had lost his mother to the RDA and in despair he urged the young tulkuns and the Metkayina warriors to fight in defense of the tulkun and the RDA had killed them all. Tsireya believed him and insists that he tell Tonowari and Jake about this, but Lo'ak refuses, saying neither of their fathers understand them. He also confided in her about his feelings of the whole clan hating him due to alienation and having avatar blood in him, to which Tsireya tells him "I see you" and insists he is the brother of a tulkun and part of the clan.

### Skirmish at the Three Brothers

When the Metkayina learn of the tulkun hunt and [[Ro'a]]'s slaughter, they become furious and declare war on the RDA in revenge. Jake tried to talk them out of the idea by pointing out that they didn't stand a chance against the Sky People and that the hunt was intended as a provocation. He instructed them to persuade the tulkun to flee and showed them a tracking tag, asking them to call him if they come across any tulkun with one of these, as this is a death sentence. Learning of the situation, Lo'ak decides to go warn Payakan of the whalers. Neteyam tried to stop him but Lo'ak angrily said that the tulkun was his brother closest to him and he had to save him. Followed by his siblings and the Metkayina kids, Lo'ak finds Payakan and discovers that he has already been tagged and sees [[Mick Scoresby]]'s SeaDragon fleet approaching.

Lo'ak tries to get the tracker out with the help of the others, meanwhile warning his father of the situation at Neteyam's request over the radio. The children manage to free Payakan from the tracking device, and speed off on their ilus but Quaritch spots them and Scoresby's jetboats enter the water in pursuit. As Neteyam attempts to use the tracking device to lure the fleet away, the other kids begin hiding below the surface. Multiple [[Mako]] subs and [[Crab Suit]] operators deploy into the water, using their weaponry to hold off the kids' ilu mounts. Lo'ak, Tsireya and Tuk are captured by a [[Mako]] sub using a net. Quaritch on his ikran pulls them out of the water and takes them aboard the SeaDragon as hostages.

Lo'ak then sees his father and the clan arriving to save them. Quaritch snatches Lo'ak's communicator and orders Jake to surrender, threatening to kill his son. As Jake swims towards the ship, Payakan notices that his friend has been captured and jumps onto the SeaDragon and attacks the crew. The distraction allowed the warriors to attack. At the moment Neteyam arrives and frees Lo'ak, Tsireya and Tuk. The girls jump into the water and begin to swim away. However, Lo'ak grabs a rifle and refuses to leave without saving Spider on board. Lo'ak and Neteyam find Spider and incapacitate his guards; Lo'ak is forced to shoot and kill a soldier during the rescue, which leaves him shaken. Neteyam grabs the gun and rushes him and Spider to escape, but Neteyam is mortally wounded by one of the Recoms.

Realizing this, Lo'ak, Spider, and Tsireya rush him to the nearby rocks. Jake and Neytiri rush in and try to save him with Lo'ak squeezing the bleeding, but after a few minutes, Neteyam perishes. Lo'ak is left painfully devastated by his death and has his hands covered in his brother's blood, apparently feeling guilty. When Jake receives a message from Quaritch that he has his daughters still aboard the sinking SeaDragon, he decides to go rescue them with Neytiri. Lo'ak wants to join his father and help him, but Jake tells that "he's done enough". This added to Lo'ak's guilt and despair.

From afar, Lo'ak witnesses the sinking of the ship. Seeing how his family could be in danger, Lo'ak leaves Tsireya with his brother. He arrives on an ilu and learns from Kiri and Spider that Jake and Neytiri are inside. Lo'ak finds his father unconscious after a fight with Quaritch, who initially mistakes him for Neteyam. Due to the two's air pocket running low, Lo'ak recites Tsireya's mantra about the way of water, coaxing a reluctant Jake into taking his last remaining breath and they attempt to swim to the surface. Payakan arrives and helps Lo'ak and his father get to the surface. Jake tells Lo'ak "I see you". The entire family reunites after the battle, relieved to be together but devastated by Neteyam's death.

Later that night Lo'ak attends his brother's funeral, while Jake and Neytiri bury Neteyam's body at the bottom of the Cove of the Ancestors. Lo'ak bursts into tears and in a last gesture of despair, reaches his arm to Neteyam, saying goodbye to him with big pain. For unclear reasons, Lo'ak does not visit Neteyam inside the Spirit Tree with his parents, although he visits the outside of it, holding onto Payakan who swims around the tree.

### Encountering the Mangkwan

In the [[Spirit World]], Lo'ak and Neteyam are flying together on their ikran. After a joyous ride, Neteyam asks Lo'ak how he died. Lo'ak tells what happened, and Neteyam reassures Lo'ak it was not his fault. Lo'ak then detaches from the Spirit Tree.

Lo'ak and Tsireya find Neytiri's bow and consider repairing it, but Lo'ak feels it is too ruined.

When the [[Tlalim clan]] arrives at [[Awa'atlu]], Lo'ak waves down at Tsireya from [[Peylak]]'s airship. Later, the clan is attacked by [[Varang]] and the [[Mangkwan clan]]. Jake provides Lo'ak with an assault rifle for cover rifle. During the raid, Lo'ak is unable to retrieve his throat communicator due to an ongoing fire.

Lo'ak is split up the clan with Tuk, Spider and Kiri. He flees with them in the forest from the Mangkwan. Although Lo'ak provides cover fire, the children are temporarily captured, but escape thanks to Kiri's powers. Lo'ak returns to Awa'atlu.

Everyone attends a council meeting with the Tulkun, and Tonowari says Payakan should be outcasted for life again due to violating the Tulkun Way. Payakan flees in misery, and this angers Lo'ak who protests in front of the whole clan. In a heated argument, Jake suggests Lo'ak is at fault for Neteyam's death, prompting Lo'ak to run off in tears and attempt suicide with a rifle in an isolated area. Lo'ak ultimately refrains, and Kiri and Tsireya find him and comfort him.

## Personality and Traits

Lo'ak is the black sheep of the Sully family who feels like a stranger within his own family and clan. Neteyam is seen lightly teasing him while Kiri claimed she hated him when they were children, calling him a "penis face". Even when Kiri is older, she still lightly shoves him out of her way in a somewhat cold manner. Lo'ak even goes so far to tell Payakan that he's all alone, even though his family is present at the village.

Because Neteyam was favored by the clan, Lo'ak has faced more social isolation and deprivation as a result. He became self-conscious because he resembles a human, having five fingers instead of four as well as eyebrows. This has made him somewhat of an outcast with the Na'vi since many have viewed him as being more human than Na'vi. No mention is made of any friends while living in the forest with the other Na'vi. Lo'ak instead identifies with outcasts like Payakan.

Lo'ak is never shown to being particularly fond of either the Na'vi or humanity, even using the Na'vi word for "demon" to refer to humanity when he uses the phrase "demon ship" (i.e. the SeaDragon), although he is only ever seen calling humanity demons after learning what the RDA did to the tulkun. The Na'vi view Lo'ak like an alien, and Lo'ak does feel like one at times on Pandora. This feeling, a lack of belonging, is not too dissimilar to how some mixed-race people feel; instead of feeling special and part of both worlds, they can feel as if they are neither and as if they are a different species. This is why he has a completely opposite reaction to Kiri when Ronal accuses him of not being a true Na'vi; Kiri shouts "Yes, we are!" but Lo'ak instead stares off into the distance in silence.

Adding to Lo'ak feeling like he does not belong with the Na'vi, it is notable that Lo'ak is never seen praising Eywa and he may be interpreted as being a more irreligious character who is apathetic towards traditional Na'vi spirituality, contrasting Kiri who feels extremely connected to Eywa. When Lo'ak and Kiri visit the Tree of Souls, Lo'ak instead watches her pray at a distance. Lo'ak is skeptical of Eywa's abilities, saying, "I don't think praying is going to do much against starships." Tuk tells Lo'ak her opinion that only Eywa can save them.

It does not help Lo'ak's loneliness either that Lo'ak has never been portrayed as having any hobbies or talents while in the forest, since the Omatikaya clan contains social groups for shared interests such as hunting, craftmaking, etc. However, Lo'ak picks up and enjoys diving while staying with the Metkayina. The Visual Dictionary even mentions that Lo'ak's ocean skillset is superior than Neteyam's, which delights Lo'ak to his surprise. However, this should not necessarily be confused as being a natural talent since Lo'ak is seen practicing with Tsireya, and it could be viewed that Lo'ak's progress is the result of hard-earned training. Additionally, it is another way for Lo'ak to be closer to Payakan.

Lo'ak is a generally kind boy who is sympathetic towards others and has a desire to help with their sometimes dangerous plights. However, he has inherited his father's stubborn and reckless rebellious nature. Unlike his older brother, Lo'ak greatly values his independence, often disobeying his father’s orders in an attempt to prove his value to him, but this often backfires. For better or for worse, Lo'ak is also shown to be rather forgiving, as he still befriended Aonung after Aonung's actions caused Lo'ak to be nearly mauled to death and eaten by an akula.

While Lo'ak is perceived as a keve’otu (troublemaker) whose actions tend to offend or annoy others, he does not cause trouble for the sake of it. His motives are altruistic in nature, often trying to help others. Even sneaking off with his siblings is the result of him trying to help them cope with boredom.

Lo'ak is shown to be very brave and won't hesitate to defy powerful or authoritative figures to do what his heart feels is right. He secretly joined his sister Kiri into sneaking into Hell's Gate to retrieve Spider, attempted to join the frontlines against the RDA, punched Aonung for insulting Kiri and his family, and tried to defend Payakan even when the whole Metkayina clan viewed him as an outcast that deserves alienation. He is shown to be outspoken at times, examples being when he gave Quaritch the double finger and when he attempted to challenge Tonowari's claims about Payakan, showing that Lo'ak doesn't just blindly believe what others tell him.

Lo'ak's tendency to get into trouble conflicts with Neteyam, who often takes the blame and consequences for his recklessness. He has a bit of a rivalry with Neteyam, jealous of the love, admiration and acceptance he receives, and wishes he could be seen positively like him; when Aonung said "I must be asking the wrong brother", this was all it took for Lo'ak to accept going outside the reef because he wanted to be seen as being the cooler brother. Despite this, Lo'ak does not hesitate to take charge in chaos, thinking quickly when threatened alone by a underwater beast, and guiding his father out of a sinking ship.


