The _**Recom M69-AR**_, also known as the **Skel M69-AR**, is a standard issue assault rifle manufactured by [[Freeborn Ballistics]]. It is specifically designed for use by [[Recombinant]]s and [[Skel Suit]]s.
It is a fairly common weapon by the time of Avatar: The Way of Water and can be seen being used by Miles Quaritch's other Recombinants and their RDA soldier counterparts in [[Skel Suit]]s, [[Jake Sully]], Omatikaya warriors, as well as in the [[Avatar: Reckoning]] and [[Avatar: Frontiers of Pandora]] video games.

## Description

The M69, alongside the [[Y70 Bullpup Rifle]], has the firepower of a Browning heavy machine gun in the hands of a [[Skel Suit]] operator. Each M69 is chambered in .50 caliber BAT (12.7x76mm) to pack a much larger punch than smaller human-scaled weapons. Moreover, each of these guns come equipped with a camera sight for better visuals and targeting. The M69 features a secondary forward grip for better fire stability and boasts a long barrel for higher muzzle velocity. An underslung grenade launcher can be attached to the secondary grip for crowd control and indirect explosive fire. M69's are seen either quipped with low-profile red dot optics or an magnified scopes (both made by IDH). Skel Suit variants are quipped with forward camera sight targeting systems and removed stocks to allow for optimal use with the Skel combat platform.

Like the majority of the Recom weapons, the M69 is also armed and chambered to fire a 0226-LSAR (Linkable Skel Assault Round) ammunition breaks into shards upon impact, creating severe lacerations that effectively deal with even the most heavily armored Pandoran wildlife through lethal hemorrhage.