_**Neytiri te Tskaha Mo'at'ite**_ is the deuteragonist and lead heroine in [Avatar](/avatar), and a major character in [[Avatar: The Way of Water]] and [[Avatar: Fire and Ash]]. An agile and fierce [[Na'vi]], as well as a proficient warrior and archer, Neytiri was the tsakarem of the [[Omatikaya clan]]. She is the second-born daughter of olo'eyktan [[Eytukan]] and tsahìk [[Mo'at]], and the younger sister of [[Sylwanin]]; the late tsakarem of the Omatikaya clan.

When Neytiri was 18 years old in 2154, she met [[Jake Sully]] in the Pandoran forest, rescuing him from viperwolves. She became his teacher in the ways of the Na'vi. Neytiri rebelled against her parents' expectations for her; despite her prior engagement to [[Tsu'tey]], she fell in love with Jake and consummated their relationship beneath the Tree of Voices, much to her mother's displeasure. During the First Pandoran War, Neytiri fought alongside Jake in the [[Battle of Ayram Alusìng]] against the Resources Development Administration. She saved him from death by killing [[Miles Quaritch]] with her bow.

Neytiri became the mother of three biological children: [[Neteyam]], [[Lo'ak]] and [[Tuktirey]], as well as the adoptive mother of [[Kiri]] and [[Spider]]. When she is around 33 years old in 2169, during the Second Pandoran War, Neytiri and her family became refugees when they are forced to flee to the [[Metkayina clan]]. During this time, Neytiri and Jake both struggle to adapt to the new environment.

## Biography

### Early life

Neytiri was born in 2136 as Neytiri te Tskaha Mo'at'ite, her name meaning she is the daughter of Mo'at. She grew up learning through songs, as all Na'vi do, learning to love and celebrate their connection with [[Eywa]] and all other life. Since she was born after humans colonized Pandora and met the Na'vi, she was used to hearing about them from her clan, and she learned how to speak some English from her mother Mo'at who also took it upon herself to learn the Sky People's language.

She would eventually be trained as a hunter and completed Iknimaya, naming her female ikran Seze. It is likely she also went Uniltaron as well, although it is unknown what Neytiri's spirit animal would be.

In 2142 when Neytiri was a young girl, Dr. [[Grace Augustine]] contacted the Omatikaya Clan and proposed the idea of a school where the Na'vi and humans can interact. Mo'at and Eytukan were against the idea but consulted Neytiri, Sylwanin, and the other children for their opinions on the matter. The children requested to visit [[Hell's Gate]], and Mo'at took them there to meet Grace and learn about human operations. Grace gave Neytiri and the other kids a tour of the base and taught them how to play basketball.

After returning home, Mo'at talked to the children about what they thought about attending the human school. Neytiri was excited by the idea, and Sylwanin pointed out that at the school, the Sky People would be able to learn from the Na'vi and not the other way around. Mo'at and Eytukan agreed to the school, but were interrupted when Ateyo showed up with a sick child who visited Hell's Gate with Mo'at. The boy had a fever since shortly after disembarking from a Samson aircraft. Soon, many other children came to Mo'at with symptoms of a mysterious illness, and Eytukan declared that the humans must have poisoned them. Neytiri also fell ill and worsened as the days went by.

Thankfully, Mo'at uncovered a cure for the disease with the help of Mireya and Grace learned that the sickness was being caused by chemicals which had been accidentally leaking from RDA machinery into the local water supply. The two of them cured all of the affected Omatikaya members with the cure made from the syekalin flower, the taste of which Neytiri notably disliked.

### Death of Sylwanin

Later, Neytiri became Grace's student at the established school and learned to speak English; she was considered to be Grace's "best student" along with her sister, Sylwanin. Tragically, the schoolhouse closed in 2152 when Sec-Ops soldiers pursued Sylwanin after she and other young hunters set a bulldozer on fire. They fled to the school hoping Grace would protect them, but they were all killed and Sylwanin was killed right in front of Neytiri, riddled with bullets in the doorway. Although Grace managed to save many of the other students, relations between the humans and the Na'vi became more strained than ever, and Neytiri's parents forbade humans from entering their land.

Due to the customs of the Omatikaya clan, Neytiri became the new tsahìk-in-training after Sylwanin's death and thus was betrothed to her sister's fiancé, Tsu'tey.

### Meeting Jake Sully

Two years later in 2154, shortly before meeting [[Jake Sully]], Neytiri is meditating at the [[Tree of Souls]] with her parents and Tsu'tey. After reflecting, Tsu'tey is excused and leaves to join his group, but Mo'at orders Neytiri, much to her annoyance, to stay, as a Tsahìk is always listening for the will of Eywa. One day while Neytiri is hunting in the woods, she spots an avatar and begins to stalk him. As she is about to kill the armed intruder with a bow, a woodsprite floats down and gently touches her arrowhead, which she takes as a sign from Eywa.

She continues to follow the avatar because of this symbol. When the avatar is attacked by a pack of [viperwolves](/viperwolf), she protects him by fending off the creatures, severely wounding one with an arrow. Upon the situation calming down, Neytiri then speaks in Na'vi to the dying viperwolf while ignoring the avatar. The avatar, whose name is Jake Sully, tries to thank her for the assistance, but this angers Neytiri and she angrily scolds him by telling him not to thank her for that as she was forced to needlessly kill three of the viperwolves to protect him which was very sad only. Neytiri told him that all of this, referring to the viperwolves' deaths were his fault, as they did not need to die. Jake asks why Neytiri saved him, and she admits it is because he has a strong heart. After the brief interaction, Neytiri begins to leave, however Jake follows her, asking for her to teach him. While running away, Neytiri tells Jake that Sky People cannot learn and don't See, and that he should not be here, meaning in the forest and on Pandora, as he does not know the ways of the forest. During their conversation as Neytiri saved Jake from falling off a bridge-like vine, dozens of woodsprites begin to land on Jake. Amazed by the sight, Neytiri sees this as a good omen from Eywa and decides to take him to Hometree, the home of her clan.

Along the way, Jake is ambushed by Tsu'tey and his hunters. Neytiri defuses the conflict, saying there is a sign and the matter should be left for her mother to decide. At Hometree, it is agreed that the clan will let him stay for refuge, but Neytiri is reluctantly forced to become Jake's tutor. During dinner, Jake sits near Neytiri and learns her name, albeit after mispronouncing it once. She shows him to the hammocks where they fall asleep.

### Teaching Jake to Be an Omatikaya

The next day follows with Neytiri teaching a persevering Jake how to form [[tsaheylu]], the bond, to ride a [[direhorse]]: a horse-like creature the size of an elephant. Over the next couple of months, she teaches him the Na'vi language, archery, how to move stealthily and balanced as Na'vi, and how to kill an animal with the appropriate respect, among other customs. Most important is the preparation for the taming of Jake's own [banshee](/ikran); a rite of passage for all prospective Na'vi hunters. During this time, Neytiri's resentment towards Jake diminishes and they gradually start to fall in love.

After much preparation, Neytiri notions to Jake that he is ready to tame his own banshee. Jake, Tsu'tey, and two other Na'vi initiates climb [[Iknimaya]] in the [[Hallelujah Mountains]], to the [[Banshee Rookery]], where Neytiri meets up with them on [[Seze]], her own banshee. When Jake tames and tentatively flies his own banshee, nearly falling to his death in the process, Neytiri is very proud, and their relationship begins to flourish, much to the disdain of Tsu'tey. Having successfully tamed his banshee, Jake accompanies Neytiri on several hunts, including the Great Hunt.

During the celebration of the hunt the following night, Neytiri asks Jake to dance with her, and Tsu'tey, along with Neytiri's parents, notice their bond growing.[2] Later, when out hunting with Neytiri, the two of them are pursued by a [[Great Leonopteryx]]. They manage to escape the beast, and back at Hometree, Neytiri explains the cultural significance of the creature and anyone who is able to successfully tame it. Jake finally undergoes the ceremony where Eytukan declares him a part of the People, and the entire clan accepts with the symbolical joining of hands, Grace and Neytiri looking on proudly.

Later, after taking him to the Trees of Voices, Neytiri informs Jake that he may carve his own bow from Hometree and choose a woman for his mate, naming a few potentials while avoiding his eyes. Jake rejects each suggestion, claiming he has already chosen a mate, "but this woman must also choose me". Neytiri replies, saying that she had already accepted Jake's proposal. She then initiates the Na'vi mating ritual by joining their queues. After they perform the custom, they spend the night together under the [[Tree of Voices]].

### Destruction of the Hometree

When Neytiri wakes the morning after she and Jake mate, she discovers the forest being torn down by several RDA bulldozers, destroying the sacred location they had spent the night under: the Trees of Voices. Neytiri can't wake Jake, as he terminated the link when he had fallen asleep the night before, so she drags his unconscious avatar away from the bulldozers. When he finally reconnects with his avatar, he quickly used a rock and destroys one bulldozer's cameras in an attempt to get them to stop. Neytiri is devastated by the carnage that the RDA had caused, sobbing openly as Jake leads her to safety as the Tree of Voices was destroyed by the RDA.

Returning to the Hometree, Tsu'tey recognizes that Neytiri and Jake have mated, and confronts Jake. When Mo'at questions her, Neytiri explains that she and Jake are mated for life, and it can't be changed. Jake tries to explain his true mission but before he can, his and Grace's avatar bodies fall to the ground, their connections severed at the mountain camp by Quaritch. Tsu'tey tries to kill Jake, but Neytiri protects her mate's avatar. When Jake and Grace return in their avatar forms, Jake explains that the RDA is coming to destroy Hometree and reveals that he was sent by the RDA to learn their ways in order to convince them to leave Hometree. The clan was enraged by the revelation and upon realizing that Jake knew about the RDA's intentions all along, a distraught and heartbroken Neytiri loses faith in Jake. She furiously rejects him and denounced his betrayal by saying he will never be one of the people with Grace told her that they tried to stop them. The Na'vi take Jake and Grace captive before preparing for the defense of their home.

Colonel Quaritch's hostile Sec-Ops force arrives at Hometree and proceeds to fire gas canisters into the settlement. The Na'vi, with the use of bows and arrows, make a futile stand against the humans, but are quickly overwhelmed. When the fleet switches to incendiary missiles, the Na'vi flee into the forest. Hometree is destroyed by the high-explosive rocket fire, and many Na'vi are killed. When Neytiri searched and found her father Eytukan, she began weeping as her father was impaled by a sharp piece of wood, much to her shock and misery. Before his death, he gave Neytiri his bow and told her to protect the clan, leaving her devastated. Shortly afterward, Jake approached Neytiri and tried to comfort her, but she angrily rejected him again, demanding him to leave the forest forever and eventually yelled at him to never come back after pushing him back, before she continued crying over her father's deceased body, although she does hold remorse over it while she, her mother and the Clan migrate to The Tree of Souls.

### Gathering Na'vi Clans for Battle

Neytiri, Mo'at, Tsu'tey, and the surviving clan members go to the Tree of Souls, where they begin to pray to Eywa. Meanwhile, Jake devises a plan to come back to the clan not only to help them against the RDA but also to try and prevent Grace from dying. Jake manages to bond with the feared great leonopteryx, becoming the sixth Toruk Makto. The Omatikaya, along with Neytiri, are in awe and accept Jake again, as he has become [[Toruk Makto]], a leader that can help them defeat the humans. Also, Neytiri and the rest of the Omatikaya see that he has not betrayed the Na'vi, but has rather come to see that the Sky People are destroying all that is good on Pandora and that he is now, as Toruk Makto, truly one of the People. Neytiri slowly approaches Jake and says "I see you", a Na'vi greeting meaning "I see who you truly are", and Jake says it back to her. Remorseful for her previous behavior against Jake, she tells him that she was afraid for her people's sake until Jake's return.

Jake tells Mo'at that Grace is dying and begs the help of Eywa. When night falls, the clan gathers and attempts to perform a consciousness transfer on Grace to transfer her human mind permanently into her avatar. As the ritual begins, Neytiri chants and prays with the rest of the clan for Eywa to save Grace, but unfortunately, her injuries are too severe and the transfer fails. Neytiri is mournful of her passing, removing Grace's [[exopack]] from her human body and resting a hand on her face.

Neytiri witnesses Jake's speech in front of the survivors of the Omatikaya clan with growing excitement. After the speech and with a plan of how to strike against the RDA, Jake takes her to the waiting great leonopteryx. With both on its back, the giant creature sets off for the other Na'vi clans, followed by many Omatikaya warriors on their banshees. Neytiri passionately aids Jake in translating his call to battle for the members of the distant clans. The night before the final assault on the RDA, Neytiri overhears Jake pleading Eywa for her help in the battle. She tells him that Eywa does not take sides and will only protect the balance of life and embraces him.

### Battle of Ayram Alusing

When Quaritch's forces appear, over two thousand Na'vi warriors led by Jake and Tsu'tey take to the skies and attack the fleet, causing huge losses on both sides. As the battle wages on, the Na'vi begin to retreat before the might of the [[RDA]]'s forces. Attempting to escape from a pursuing Samson, Neytiri flies low over the battle on the ground and is shot at by [[Lyle Wainfleet]] in an [AMP](/amp) suit. Thrown to the ground after falling to the jungle floor below, Neytiri survives uninjured, but Seze is killed. Neytiri attempts to flee from the advancing ground forces and hides behind a tree, with Quaritch's soldiers bearing down on her, preventing her from escaping. When all things seem bleak, the native wildlife of Pandora strikes back in force, signaling that Jake's earlier plea to Eywa for help was not unheard. The ground and aerial troops are scattered by the wildlife and destroyed, while the Valkyrie shuttle carrying the explosives is destroyed by Jake before it reaches the Tree of Souls.

A [[thanator]] finds Neytiri in the jungle and allows her to ride it through tsaheylu. Jake manages to bring down Quaritch's Dragon Gunship, but the Colonel manages to get into his AMP suit and escape the ship's destruction. Quaritch finds the camp containing the avatar link units by chance, where Neytiri engages him on the back of her thanator. However, Quaritch kills the thanator with his [[AMP suit knife]] and is about to kill Neytiri when Jake arrives in his avatar form to challenge him. As they fight, Jake destroys the AMP's life support but is caught in the suit's grip. Neytiri saves Jake by shooting two arrows into Quaritch's chest, killing the Colonel. The camp is damaged during Quaritch's attack and exposes the interior and its inhabitant to the toxic Pandoran atmosphere, leaving Jake's human body suffocating.

After Neytiri kills Quaritch, she holds Jake's avatar body and realizes that he isn't there. She rushes into the link shack and finds Jake's real body lying on the floor, unconscious. She holds him in her arms and puts an exopack on his face, saving his life. Jake is able to breathe again and he puts his hand on her cheek and says "I see you". Neytiri starts to cry and responds with "I see you" as she holds his hand closer to her cheek and closes her eyes. This is the first time she sees him in his human form. This permanently reaffirms their love for each other, as the Na'vi often see humans as demons or evil.

After Jake has reconnected to his avatar, he and Neytiri are guided through the jungle by Ka'ani to a mortally wounded Tsu'tey, who had been found in the jungle by a group of surviving Na'vi warriors. Tsu'tey knows that his death is inevitable and decides to give leadership of the Omatikaya to Jake and begs him to end his suffering by killing him. Jake refuses first, but Tsu'tey says that he will be remembered since he battled with Toruk Makto. He honors Jake by calling him brother and states it would be a great honor to have him be his last shadow. Neytiri shows deep sorrow and weeps for him as Jake mercifully kills Tsu'tey to end his suffering before praying that his soul will become one with Eywa.

Having put an end to the RDA's attack, the Na'vi round up the remaining humans to be sent back to Earth, while allowing a handful to stay with them on Pandora. This includes [[Norm Spellman]] and Dr. [[Max Patel]]. Jake decides to stay in his avatar form forever, and concludes his final entry log of his experiences on his birthday. Returning to the Tree of Souls, he undergoes the consciousness transfer from his human body to his avatar form. Neytiri watches over Jake's two bodies during the process. After his human body passes away, she removes his exopack and kisses the shut eyes of his former body. As the consciousness transfer was completed Jake awakens to a new life as a Na'vi.

### Raising a Family

At some point, Neytiri became pregnant with her first child, [[Neteyam]], and gave birth in 2155. On the occasion of Neteyam's birth, Neytiri sang a [[Songcord]] for her son. The Sully's firstborn was welcomed by the entire Omatikaya clan, and since she and Jake had also adopted Kiri who was born from Grace's avatar around the same time, they both performed the first connection ritual with Eywa, also singing verses from the songcord for [[Kiri]].

In the years that followed, she gave birth to two more children: a son, [[Lo'ak]], and a daughter, [[Tuktirey]]. A human boy named [Spider Socorro](/spider) was very close to the Sully family and spent much of his time with the Sully children. The family probably knew the identity of Spider's father, [[Miles Quaritch]], from the beginning. Neytiri was the only family member who did not accept Spider. In her opinion, the boy belonged to his own kind.

During Lo'ak's ikran taming, Jake becomes concerned for Lo'ak's welfare, although Neytiri insists the danger is part of the rite. Neytiri is emotionally shaken and weeps in joy that Lo'ak is alive. Later, Jake and Neytiri have a discussion about their children facing dangers. Though they sympathize with each other's viewpoints, Neytiri mentions Jake has been breaking the Three Laws of Eywa by teaching their hunters to use guns made of metal. Jake insists even though he is not human, he still feels he is a marine and that he is still like the Sky People.

After Lo'ak tamed his own Ikran on the second attempt, and the clan celebrates his success, by decision of the council of elders, the Omatikaya were given a new Hometree. Neytiri made sure that the whole family held a proper thanksgiving prayer meeting. Neytiri does not like that Kiri has invited Spider into the family gathering. Jake tries to talk to Pentìyaru about the Sky People potentially returning, but Neytiri insists they just enjoy themselves for tonight. Neytiri also tries to convince Jake that their people need hope, although Jake feels as if he is lying to his people. In their conversation, Neytiri expresses her concerns about Spider, thinking that the boy is a bad influence on her children and she doesn't like that Kiri spends so much time with him. But Jake tells her not to be so hard on him, and also explains to Neytiri on what the word "sin" means.

After the two put their kids to sleep, Jake and Neytiri go on a night date. As they rest on the ground, Jake looks up and sees a massive light in the sky, making Jake and Neytiri realize the RDA is back much to their horror. Later on, after the children suddenly disappear during a council meeting and are found, Neytiri has a massive argument with Spider regarding human nature and their previous war with the Na'vi. Neytiri demands that Spider stay away from Kiri. When [[Frances Ardmore]] broadcasts her message to the humans, Neytiri is at a loss, and Jake tells her that everyone are simply scared for their lives.

Jake and Neytiri talk about their upcoming plan to fight the RDA in space. As the Sully family prepares to go their own ways, Kiri can not be found. Neytiri and Jake find Kiri at Hell's Gate, trying to convince Nash McCosker to let her take Spider with the Sully family. Neytiri grabs Kiri's arm and tries to take her away from Spider which upsets Kiri and makes her shout, "Let go of me!" Kiri insists Spider is their family, but Neytiri tells her that he is not. This causes Kiri to flee in anger. Neytiri tells Jake not to follow in order to give Kiri time to process.

### Witnessing the RDA's return

As soon as the RDA returned to Pandora, instead of remaining on orbit they started disembarking into the moon's atmosphere with their ten ships, namely the ISV Manifest Destiny, with their high powerful energy from their engines thrust lead to sending firestorms towards the ground, causing a region of the forest near the Omatikaya to be burned down, including many Hometrees. The firestorm also burned many of the fleeing animals to their deaths.

After, the RDA dropped a Landing Module to the burned land and started using their bulldozers, marking the re-colonizing of Pandora again by humanity. Neytiri, Jake and the remaining animals reached higher ground and watched the fires from afar. The horror of the sight made a distraught Neytiri weep, and Jake cradled her as the destruction led to the land of the Omatikaya becoming torn apart due to the RDA's actions. The company subsequently built [[Bridgehead]] to make it the new home for humanity. Over the next year, Jake and Neytiri, along with the rest of the Omatikaya clan and the Resistance, campaign to hinder the RDA's expansion into Pandora during the Second Pandoran War.

### Aiding the Resistance

One day, the Na'vi launch a guerrilla attack on a Mag-Lev train carrying resources to the new [[Bridgehead]] base, resulting in destruction of the railway. From the back of her mount Neytiri shoots down the flying machines protecting the train, killing the pilots with her arrows. Neteyam, for his part, was injured when a Kestrel Gunship attacked them. Upon returning to [[High Camp]], Jake berates his sons for disobeying his orders and Neytiri points out that his son is injured and needs treatment. Later, during a private conversation, Neytiri reminds Jake that the boys are his family, not a military unit, to which Jake confesses that he only wants to protect them and tries to maintain discipline.

A few days later, while Neytiri was on a flight with Jake and Neteyam, they receive a call from Lo'ak, his sisters, and Spider, informing them of suspected armed Avatars at [[Site 26]] and Jake orders them to leave quickly and quietly. Jake, Neytiri and Neteyam fly off in their ikrans to rescue the children. Neytiri lurks in the forest and kills a male Recom named Sean Fike and a female Recom named Walker, during which Neytiri is shocked to hear that Miles Quaritch has returned as a recombinant and she vows to kill him as many times as necessary. Despite her and Jake's best efforts, Spider ended up being abducted.

### Living with the Metkayina Clan

Knowing the danger Spider's knowledge poses to their safety, and also to avoid further persecution of the Omatikaya clan, Jake tries to convince Neytiri to banish themselves and retreat to the [[Metkayina clan]]'s reef. Neytiri initially refuses to do so, saying that the forest is all the children know, and she herself cannot leave her people since her father entrusted to her to protect the clan and reminded Jake that he is Toruk Makto. Jake explains that the children are in mortal danger as Spider was captured by Quaritch and since Spider knows their whole operation and might give their location away to the RDA, their family must protect the Omatikaya at all costs since the clan could be executed for harboring the Sully family. Although devastated, Neytiri begrudgingly accepts the idea. At the Tree of Souls, Jake transfers chief leadership to Tarsem.

Following the transfer of leadership, the Sully family, in front of the entire clan, abandon their current home, mount their ikrans, and migrate to the lands of the Metkayina clan. Desperate, Neytiri cries and during the flight, turning back to watch the forest as she leaves it behind. Jake watches her and the others with determination and remorse. After migrating across the sea to the reef clan, Jake seeks sanctuary from the clan leader, [[Tonowari]]. His mate [[Ronal]] is incredibly skeptical, however, causing Neytiri to defend Jake as the one who helped resist the Sky People.

The two start growling at each other and Jake tries to apologize for Neytiri, saying she is exhausted, but she tells him not to apologize for her. Jake's request ends up being accepted, though Tonowari insists they learn sea life and pull their own weight. It is not entirely known how Neytiri pulls her weight around the village, and she is not seen learning how to free-dive or ride an [[ilu]] or [[skimwing]] like Jake and her children, though she is seen apparently cooking.

While making dinner with Kiri after she was bullied by [[Aonung]], she asks her daughter what is bothering her to which Kiri states grumpily that she is fine, only briefly mentioning that she is upset by not being like everyone else. Despite Neytiri's sincere concern, Kiri continues to be upset, shrugging off Neytiri when Neytiri fixes Kiri's hair braid behind her ear; although this scene later returns with Kiri venting to Jake about missing Spider and feeling Eywa's heartbeat. In the evening after, while talking with Kiri, Jake is informed by Aonung and Neteyam that Lo'ak is missing. This leads to when Lo'ak is found, Neytiri becomes upset with Lo'ak, having learned that he went hunting beyond the reef. Although Tonowari clarified that his son was at fault for taking Lo'ak away from the reef, Lo'ak decided to take the blame from Aonung.

When Kiri suffers a seizure while connected to the [[Spirit Tree]] and falls into a coma, Ronal wants to help her with a ritual method. Upon seeing Norm and Max already trying to help Kiri, Ronal becomes discouraged and outraged, saying that they do not need her help. Neytiri is disgusted by how easily Ronal gives up on saving Kiri and reminds Ronal that she is the Tsahìk. Seeing Ronal acquiesce to helping, Neytiri orders Norm and Max to leave so Ronal can work. Ronal is eventually able to help Kiri awaken from her coma, much to Neytiri's relief.

Later, when the clan sounds a shell alarm, Neytiri sees that the [[tulkun]] have returned home. She along with Jake riding their skimwing, watch the tulkun in amazement. Neytiri even notices a mother with her baby. On a rainy day, Tonowari breaks the news to Jake and Neytiri that the Sky People are nearby and are searching for them. Neytiri thinks they should find Quaritch and kill him, although Jake is reluctant and thinks it is an unwise move, saying it would reveal their location. Later, Neytiri chastises Lo'ak for speaking back against Tonowari when he warns of [[Payakan]], after the latter found out about his friendship with the outcast.

### Skirmish at the Three Brothers

When Ronal discovers the corpse of her spiritual sister [[Ro'a]] who was killed by tulkun hunters, Neytiri feels sincerely sorry for her, presumably because she remembers what it was like losing Seze. As she and Jake move past Ro'a, she and Jake discover a tracking device embedded in Ro'a's body. Jake realizes that the device is meant to lead Quaritch to them, and convinces the Metkayina to tell their tulkun to flee the village. However, Neytiri is upset because she believes they should fight, but Jake tells her that it is a trap and Quaritch is hunting them. After receiving a distress call from Lo'ak that he is in danger with his siblings and friends, Neytiri prepares for war, grabbing her bow and riding her [[ikran]] along with Jake and the rest of the clan riding their skimwings. She helps fight the RDA around the SeaDragon.

During the skirmish, Neteyam dies and Neytiri is horrified. Jake tells Neytiri that now is not the time for mourning when their daughters need saving, and she must have a strong heart. Fueled by Neteyam's death, Neytiri goes completely berserk while aboard the SeaDragon with Jake, and goes on a murderous rampage where she brutalizes and kills all of Quaritch's squad including Zdinarsik. Neytiri ends up breaking her father's bow during her rampage. She later holds Spider hostage in an attempt to get Quaritch to release Kiri. She lightly cuts Spider's chest as a warning and then threatens to fatally stab him. Quaritch releases Kiri but the ship begins to sink as Jake and Quaritch get in a knife fight.

While fleeing, Tuk falls down a shaft and Neytiri jumps in after to rescue her. The two become involved in an intense race against the flooding, but they soon become trapped. Kiri uses her bond with Eywa to summon a [[gill mantle]] and bioluminescent [[squid lantern]]s that help her save Neytiri and Tuk, and which then guide the entire family to the surface. Kiri hands the gill mantle to Neytiri and they are able to escape. Neytiri finds the rest of her family and they all lovingly embrace.

When Spider returns to the group, Neytiri is not seen acknowledging his presence or looking in the boy's direction. Instead she is focused on cradling Neteyam and stroking her hands through his hair. In the aftermath, the Sully family sorrowfully conduct Neteyam's funeral according to Metkayina customs. Neytiri wears Neteyam's neckpiece and sings the first verse of the songcord from his birth. They lay his body to rest in the [[Cove of the Ancestors]] where it is absorbed by the Spirit Tree.

Jake then proceeds to inform Tonowari and Ronal of his decision to leave the reef and move far away. Tonowari, however, respectfully identifies him as part of the Metkayina clan and welcomes his family to stay. Neytiri joins Jake to visit Neteyam's memory within Eywa at the Spirit Tree. Neytiri smiles in their shared vision as she sees Jake with Neteyam, while her true body's face is filled with a blissful look of happiness and serenity.

### Conflict with the Mangkwan

While trying to process her son's death, Neytiri falls into a deep depression and begins to feel like a failure as a mother. She spends much of her time alone in her marui, singing her songcord constantly to feel closer to Neteyam.

One day, Tonowari and Ronal are upset Jake is not following the Na'vi Way by encouraging gun usage. Later, while Neytiri and Jake are in their marui, Jake offers her some grenade arrows but she declines. Neytiri mentions she believes in the Na'vi Way, but did not feel comfortable protesting against Jake in front of Ronal.

The two have a tense conversation in which Jake loses faith in Eywa and the power of prayer. Neytiri interrupts him before he can mention Neteyam died. She tells him she has nothing except her faith Neteyam died as part of Eywa's great plan, but Jake reminds her she has her family, as well as his love.

One night, Spider nearly suffocates. While the rest of the Sully family tries to find his spare exopack, Neytiri does not search for it, possibly implying she hid it in an attempt to discreetly kill him.

When the [[Tlalim clan]] arrives at [[Awa'atlu]], Neytiri and Jake agree Spider should return to High Camp with the clan. While informing the children, Neytiri is called out by Kiri for her disdain of humanity. Neytiri coldly tells Kiri that Spider will never be part of their family. The family agrees to go with Spider during the trip as a compromise. Peylak agrees with Jake and Neytiri that they will be outriders and the clan departs with the Sully family.

During the trip, the [[Mangkwan Clan]] attacks. Neytiri is greatly injured by [[Varang]], the leader of the clan, and falls to the forest floor.

## Personality and Traits

Neytiri respects the Na'vi way of life and is careful to obey their laws and traditions; at least initially. Due to being raised among the Na'vi, her and Jake do not always see eye to eye, but they try to pragmatically work together and cooperate through the various conflicts they face in their lives, showing Neytiri's ability to see someone else's perspective. Neytiri is said by Grace to have been one of her best students at her school, suggesting she is quite intelligent and curious. Neytiri looked up to her older sister Sylwanin as a role model and was taught by her that not all human beings are evil, though her view of the species was heavily damaged after Sylwanin was murdered by one. The event made her grow to believe that Sky People are unable to See.

However, after her chance encounter with Jake and seeing signs he deserves protection by Eywa, Neytiri begins to question the ideas taught by her clan, seeing that there are more truths to the world than the ones her clan believes in. For example, after Tsu'tey claims Jake is a "demon in a false body", she does not automatically believe this claim as she has already repeatedly seen Jake's innocence and his caring, loving side. Neytiri begins to internally struggle between following her clan's expectations of her, versus her own true feelings. She begins to develop a more rebellious side; Neytiri is not someone who would just blindly follow orders and has been known to disobey her parents and her mate. She disobeys her parents by mating for life with Jake and later she disobeys Jake when he orders her to retreat from advancing human troops, which would have likely resulted in her death if Eywa had not sent the Pandoran wildlife.

Like her mate, Neytiri is brave, loyal, strong-willed, and shares a love of flying and frequently rides on her ikran, Seze. Neytiri cares for Seze and mourns her when she is killed. Neytiri is devoted to her people and is willing to put herself in a dangerous situation for the sake of her clan. At one point, she plans to take on a group of AMP suits and human soldiers single-handedly, even though it could be suicide.

Neytiri is also quite wise for her years, possibly due to having to endure an extreme amount of tragedy, such as her sister's death as well as her father's later on. She can usually see past someone's flaws to the heart within, supported by her relationship with Jake; she falls in love with him because of his strong heart, and even when she sees him in his human form, she does not stop loving him and weeps due to being overwhelmed after finally seeing the man behind the avatar.

One of Neytiri's greatest fears is the idea of change and she is resistant to it due to her past experiences with losing her loved ones. She yearns for a simple and peaceful life, and abhors Jake's idea to move away from her clan. Sometimes her desire for her life to stay the same may cloud her judgement, as her children would technically be in the grounds of a war zone.

Neytiri has a tendency to get angry when people close to her do wrong or when others try to offend or harm her loved ones. When Tsu'tey tries to kill Jake's unconscious body, she attacks Tsu'tey, flinging him away, and then ferociously defends Jake's vulnerable body. When Jake reveals his true mission to the clan, Neytiri is heartbroken and yells furiously at him for that, probably thinking his love for her was a lie, resulting in his rejection from the clan as a traitor. However, she later forgives Jake when he returns to the Omatikaya as the sixth Toruk Makto because she realizes that he was a traitor to the Sky People, not the Na'vi and that his love for her is true and far deeper than Neytiri ever thought. When Quaritch tries to kill Jake, Neytiri uses all her rage and emotion to kill the colonel. It is also shown that when Neytiri is under heavy mental stress, she can lose her temper at others in a rude fashion; when Norm and Max flew across the world for the sole purpose of trying to help Kiri awaken from her coma and they volunteered their free time to help her family, she shouted at them "Out! You have done nothing!" despite their good will and efforts.

Due to her life experiences, Neytiri displayed incredible disdain towards humanity, even using racial slurs such as "pinkasses" and "pinkskins". She felt a young Spider should be with his own kind instead of mingling around her children, and also once told Tuktirey that humans have their heads in the clouds. One of her challenges involve accepting Spider around her family, whom she reacts with bias and hostility around. Another is being more compassionate since she does not naturally feel it for humans, as the RDA's Sec-Ops was responsible for the deaths of her sister, father and son. It has been said that Neytiri will eventually learn that not all humans are the same.

Neytiri also believed that all humans are responsible for the war on Pandora, which is shown when she entirely blames Spider for nearly getting Kiri and Lo'ak killed when investigating the RDA Scorpion, despite Lo'ak being the one indirectly responsible, as well as being aggressive towards Norm and Max, despite their siding towards the Na'vi as well as trying to help Kiri recover from her coma. 15 years later, after the untimely death of Neteyam, a darker, more aggressive, and more violent side to Neytiri is shown as a result of her severely damaged mental health, internalized trauma, grief, and rage at the Sky People for killing her family and ruining her life. Neytiri once again has to find it within her heart to accept, forgive or work with the human invaders.

Since Neteyam's death, Neytiri began to increasingly generalize humanity, which she displayed towards Spider. She was completely unmoved by his near death and had no qualms over suggesting that Jake executed Spider (and later attempted to do it herself) after he gained the ability to breathe Pandora's air and the RDA was attempting to replicate it. She merely dismissed him as a "pinkskin" that wasn't worth risking her family over. When Jake confronted her about her attitude, she breaks down saying that she has come to hate everything about humanity from their hands to the "insanity in their minds", showing how generalized her distain has become. However, after Jake got her to realize this has made her secretly ashamed of her children for having human blood in them, she seemed to become horrified by this revelation and motivated her to lessen her hatred. Afterward, she was no longer seen trying to murder Spider or vouch for his death, even defending him from Ronal who voiced similar concerns as hers by saying it is the "will of Eywa". This displays that she has become more willing to get over her hatred, at least toward her human allies, if anything for the sake of her family.

After witnessing how much Spider risked his life in saving Jake, Neytiri had a change of heart and finally accepted him as an adoptive son, moving on from her prejudice at last. She continued to fight bravely on the battlefield, and showing concern for her children, even telling Lo'ak to take Spider, Tuk and Kiri far from the war in case she and Jake are killed. Despite her bickering with Ronal, Neytiri promised to watch over Pril, Ronal's newborn daughter.

## Abilities

Neytiri is a formidable warrior who is incredibly skilled with a bow, and taught Jake how to use one as well. She is also skilled in close-range combat with her knife. She single-handedly defeated the pack of viperwolves that had attacked Jake using both her bow and knife. Neytiri managed to kill the deadly warrior, Colonel Quaritch, with her father's bow, even when the latter was armored with an AMP suit and the Na'vi have a very slim understanding of their technology. However, Quaritch was distracted when trying to slit Jake's throat and hadn't noticed Neytiri's actions. Neytiri was also able to slaughter over ten fighters on the SeaDragon. Despite her reluctance to use human weaponry, she used special grenade arrows built by Jake to aid in his escape.

In addition to her fighting skills, Neytiri is an excellent flyer. She is also a convincing actress, disguising herself as a member of the Mangkwan clan to infiltrate Bridgehead undetected.

Like many Na'vi, Neytiri learned English at Grace's school. Her speech is a little broken and accented at first, but it improves through her time with Jake.